The plastic things on the end of shoelaces are called aglets.
Nepal is the only country that doesn't have a rectangular flag.
The Hawaiian alphabet has only 12 letters.
Tigers have striped skin, not just striped fur.
Cats have over 100 vocal sounds; dogs only have about 10.
A cow gives nearly 200,000 glasses of milk in her lifetime.
Greenland is the largest island in the world.
The fingerprints of koala bears are virtually indistinguishable from those of humans.
Human thighbones are stronger than concrete.
The letters KGB stand for Komitet Gosudarstvennoy Bezopasnosti.
The name Wendy was popularized by the book "Peter Pan" (though not invented by it).
The thyroid cartilage is more commonly known as the Adam's apple.
The Australian $5 to $100 notes are made of plastic (polymer).
Cats' urine glows under a black light.
The world's oldest piece of chewing gum is over 5,000 years old.
Most dust particles in your house are made from dead skin.
During his entire life, Vincent Van Gogh sold very few paintings (possibly only one during his lifetime).
The number "four" is considered unlucky in Japan because it is pronounced the same as "death".
A cow can walk upstairs but not downstairs easily.
Andorra has one of the longest average lifespans in the world.
There is a hotel in Sweden built entirely out of ice; it is rebuilt every year.
Nutmeg is extremely poisonous if consumed in large quantities.
More people are killed annually by donkeys than by airplane crashes.
Ancient Egyptians shaved off their eyebrows to mourn the deaths of their cats.
Peanuts are one of the ingredients that can be used to make dynamite (peanut oil).
In 1386, a pig in France was executed by public hanging for the murder of a child.
Hershey's Kisses are called that because the machine that makes them looks like it's kissing the conveyor belt.
Women blink nearly twice as much as men.
Humans are the only primates that don't have pigment in the palms of their hands.
Mel Blanc (the voice of Bugs Bunny) was allergic to carrots.
Jim Henson first coined the word "Muppet". It is a combination of "marionette" and "puppet."
Al Capone's business card said he was a used furniture dealer.
The highest point in Pennsylvania is lower than the lowest point in Colorado.
Our eyes are always the same size from birth, but our nose and ears never stop growing.
Chocolate can kill dogs; it directly affects their heart and nervous system.
The U.S. military operates over 200 golf courses.
The most popular first name in the world is Muhammad.
Coca-Cola contained coca (whose active ingredient is cocaine) from 1885 to 1903.
There are about 2-3 chickens for every human in the world.
The Guinness Book of Records holds the record for being the book most often stolen from libraries.
Most lipstick contains fish scales (or similar ingredients for shimmer).
John Adams and Thomas Jefferson both died on July 4th, 1826.
The Boston University Bridge is one of the few places where a boat can sail under a train driving under a car driving under an airplane.
Half of all Americans live within 50 miles of their birthplace.
Frank Lloyd Wright's son invented Lincoln Logs.
Bees have 5 eyes. There are 3 small eyes on the top of a bee's head and 2 larger ones in front.
"Almost" is the longest word in the English language with all the letters in alphabetical order.
Iceland consumes more Coca-Cola per capita than any other nation.
The male seahorse carries the eggs until they hatch instead of the female.
Porcupines can float in water.
The katydid bug hears through holes in its hind legs.
A standard 2" × 4" piece of lumber is actually 1.5" × 3.5".
"Stewardesses" is the longest word typed with only the left hand.
Hawaii is the only U.S. state that grows coffee commercially.
Half of all bank robberies take place on a Friday.
Emus and kangaroos cannot walk backwards, and are on the Australian coat of arms for that reason.
Cranberries are sorted for ripeness by bouncing them; a fully ripened cranberry can be dribbled like a basketball.
A giraffe can clean its ears with its 21-inch tongue.
No word in the English language rhymes with "month".
Almonds are a member of the peach family.
Like fingerprints, everyone's tongue print is different.
The longest recorded flight of a chicken is 13 seconds.
In Vermont, the ratio of cows to people is approximately 10:1.
The pancreas produces insulin.
Every time you lick a stamp, you're consuming about 1/10 of a calorie.
A sneeze travels out of your mouth at over 100 miles per hour.
The average person walks the equivalent of three times around the world in a lifetime.
Honey is the only food that doesn't spoil.
A shrimp's heart is in its head.
Slugs have four noses.
Elephants are the only animals that can't jump.
A rhinoceros' horn is made of hair.
It is physically impossible for a human to lick their own elbow.
A crocodile cannot stick its tongue out.
Starfish don't have brains.
Polar bears are left-pawed (though not all of them).
Approximately 90% of the population is right-handed.
The dot over the letter 'i' is called a tittle.
Typewriter is the longest word that can be typed using only the top row of a QWERTY keyboard.
The word "set" has more definitions than any other word in the English language.
"Underground" is the only word in the English language that begins and ends with the letters "und".
There are more possible iterations of a game of chess than there are atoms in the known universe.
Bananas are berries, but strawberries aren't.
Octopuses have three hearts.
Wombat poop is cube-shaped.
A group of flamingos is called a "flamboyance".
A group of crows is called a "murder".
A group of owls is called a "parliament".
The unicorn is the national animal of Scotland.
Saudi Arabia imports camels from Australia.
The shortest war in history was between Britain and Zanzibar on August 27, 1897. Zanzibar surrendered after 38 minutes.
The Eiffel Tower can be 15 cm taller during the summer due to thermal expansion.
Venus is the only planet that spins clockwise.
A day on Venus is longer than a year on Venus.
The Great Wall of China is not visible from space with the naked eye.
There are more trees on Earth than stars in the Milky Way galaxy.
Russia has a larger surface area than Pluto.
The human nose can detect over 1 trillion different scents.
Your brain uses 20% of your body's energy while being only 2% of your body weight.
The human body contains enough iron to make a 3-inch nail.
You produce about 1 liter of saliva every day.
The average person farts 14 times a day.
Your stomach acid is strong enough to dissolve razor blades.
You can't hum while holding your nose closed.
Everyone has a unique tongue print, just like fingerprints.
The human eye can distinguish about 10 million different colors.
Babies are born with 300 bones, but adults only have 206.
Your heart beats about 100,000 times per day.
Blood makes up about 8% of your body weight.
The average person will spend 6 months of their life waiting for red lights to turn green.
You share your birthday with at least 9 million other people in the world.
The average person will spend 25 years sleeping.
Humans shed about 600,000 particles of skin every hour.
The average person produces enough saliva in their lifetime to fill two swimming pools.
Your left lung is smaller than your right lung to make room for your heart.
The human body has enough fat to make seven bars of soap.
Humans are the only animals that blush.
The strongest muscle in the human body is the masseter (jaw muscle).
Your hair grows faster in warm weather.
Fingernails grow nearly 4 times faster than toenails.
The average person will walk about 110,000 miles in their lifetime.
You cannot snore and dream at the same time.
The average person laughs about 15 times a day.
Humans are born with the ability to swim and hold their breath, but we forget as we grow.
The human brain is more active during sleep than during the day.
Your body has enough carbon to fill 9,000 pencils.
The average person will eat about 35 tons of food in their lifetime.
Humans are the only species that cry emotional tears.
The brain itself cannot feel pain.
Your nose and ears continue growing throughout your entire life.
The human body has over 600 muscles.
Your tongue heals faster than any other part of your body.
Humans glow in the dark, but the light is too dim for our eyes to see.
The average person blinks about 15-20 times per minute.
Your eyes can distinguish between 500 shades of gray.
The average person's skin weighs twice as much as their brain.
You lose about 50-100 hairs every day.
The human body contains about 37.2 trillion cells.
Your brain is about 75% water.
The average person will spend 2 weeks of their life kissing.
Your small intestine is about 20 feet long.
The human body produces about 25 million new cells each second.
Your eyes stay the same size from birth, but your nose and ears never stop growing.
The average person will produce about 25,000 quarts of saliva in a lifetime.
Your heart will beat about 3 billion times in your lifetime.
The human body has enough phosphorus to make 2,200 match heads.
Your brain uses 20 watts of power, about the same as a dim light bulb.
The average person will spend 3 years of their life on the toilet.
Your blood travels 12,000 miles through your body every day.
The human body has enough sulfur to kill all the fleas on a dog.
Antarctica is the largest desert in the world.
The Amazon rainforest produces 20% of the world's oxygen.
There are more lakes in Canada than in all other countries combined.
The Dead Sea is 429 meters below sea level, making it the lowest point on Earth.
Lake Baikal in Russia contains 20% of the world's fresh water.
The Sahara Desert is almost as large as the United States.
Mount Everest grows about 4 millimeters every year.
The Pacific Ocean is shrinking, while the Atlantic Ocean is growing.
The world's largest living organism is a fungus in Oregon that covers 2,385 acres.
There are more volcanoes in the ocean than on land.
The Ring of Fire is home to 75% of the world's volcanoes.
Lightning strikes the Earth about 100 times every second.
A bolt of lightning is five times hotter than the surface of the sun.
The driest place on Earth is the Atacama Desert in Chile.
The wettest place on Earth is Mawsynram, India.
The largest snowflake ever recorded was 15 inches wide.
A single cloud can weigh more than 1 million pounds.
The coldest temperature ever recorded on Earth was -128.6°F in Antarctica.
The hottest temperature ever recorded on Earth was 134°F in Death Valley, California.
The world's largest hailstone weighed 2.2 pounds.
Rainbows are actually full circles, but we only see half because of the ground.
Red, orange, and yellow sunsets are caused by particles in the atmosphere.
The Earth's core is as hot as the surface of the sun.
The Earth is not perfectly round; it's slightly flattened at the poles.
The Earth's magnetic field is generated by its liquid iron core.
The Earth rotates at about 1,000 miles per hour at the equator.
The Earth orbits the sun at about 67,000 miles per hour.
The moon is moving away from Earth at a rate of about 1.5 inches per year.
The moon has moonquakes, similar to earthquakes.
There is no sound in space because there's no air to carry sound waves.
The sun is 400 times larger than the moon but also 400 times farther away, which is why they appear the same size.
One million Earths could fit inside the sun.
The sun loses about 4 million tons of mass every second.
The sun will eventually become a red giant and engulf Earth.
Neutron stars are so dense that a teaspoon of their material would weigh about 6 billion tons.
A day on Mercury is longer than its year.
Jupiter has the shortest day of all the planets (about 10 hours).
Jupiter's Great Red Spot is a storm that has been raging for at least 400 years.
Saturn's rings are made of ice and rock particles.
Saturn is the least dense planet; it would float in water.
Uranus rotates on its side.
Neptune has the strongest winds in the solar system, reaching speeds of 1,200 mph.
Pluto is smaller than Russia.
There are more stars in the universe than grains of sand on all the beaches on Earth.
The closest star to Earth (besides the sun) is Proxima Centauri, about 4.24 light-years away.
Light from the sun takes about 8 minutes to reach Earth.
A light-year is about 5.88 trillion miles.
The Milky Way galaxy is about 100,000 light-years wide.
The Milky Way contains about 100-400 billion stars.
The universe is about 13.8 billion years old.
Honey never spoils. Archaeologists have found 3,000-year-old honey in Egyptian tombs that's still edible.
A single spaghetti strand is called a "spaghetto".
Apples float in water because they are 25% air.
Carrots were originally purple.
Ketchup was sold as medicine in the 1830s.
The fear of vegetables is called lachanophobia.
Peanuts are not nuts; they're legumes.
Cashews grow on the bottom of a cashew apple.
Strawberries are the only fruit with seeds on the outside.
A cucumber is 95% water.
Tomatoes have more genes than humans.
The most expensive pizza in the world costs $12,000.
Ranch dressing is the most popular salad dressing in the United States.
Fortune cookies were invented in California, not China.
Chocolate was once used as currency by the Aztecs.
White chocolate isn't technically chocolate because it doesn't contain cocoa solids.
The world's most expensive coffee is made from elephant dung.
Pound cake got its name from its original recipe: a pound of butter, eggs, sugar, and flour.
Apples, peaches, and raspberries are all members of the rose family.
Arachibutyrophobia is the fear of peanut butter sticking to the roof of your mouth.
The world's largest pizza was 122 feet in diameter.
Pistachios are technically fruits.
Coconuts kill more people than sharks every year.
A strawberry is not actually a berry, but a banana is.
Potatoes can absorb and reflect WiFi signals.
Ripe cranberries will bounce like rubber balls.
Lemons contain more sugar than strawberries.
The McDonald's in Japan serves shrimp burgers.
Dynamite is made from peanuts.
Green, yellow, and red bell peppers are not the same vegetable; they're different cultivars.
Avocados are toxic to birds.
Crackers have small holes to prevent air bubbles during baking.
The Popsicle was invented by an 11-year-old in 1905.
The longest English word without a vowel is "rhythms".
The word "nerd" was first coined by Dr. Seuss in 1950.
The symbol "&" is called an ampersand.
The shortest complete sentence in the English language is "I am".
The word "queue" is the only word pronounced the same when its last four letters are removed.
"Bookkeeper" is the only word in English with three consecutive double letters.
The letter "e" is the most common letter in the English language.
The word "alphabet" comes from the first two letters of the Greek alphabet: alpha and beta.
"Strengths" is the longest word with only one vowel.
The dot over the lowercase "i" and "j" is called a "tittle".
The sentence "The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog" uses every letter in the English alphabet.
The word "goodbye" comes from "God be with ye".
The hashtag symbol is also called an octothorpe.
The word "testify" is based on Roman men swearing on their testicles.
"Pronunciation" is the word most mispronounced.
The longest word in the English language is 189,819 letters long (the chemical name for titin).
The word "vowel" contains every vowel except for "o".
Actually, "vowel" contains every vowel including "o". Let me fix that: "facetious" contains all vowels in order.
The word "swims" upside down is still "swims".
"Four" is the only number in English spelled with the same number of letters as its value.
The word "mortgage" comes from French and literally means "death pledge".
The longest one-syllable word in English is "screeched".
"Dreamt" is the only English word that ends in "mt".
The word "lethologica" describes the inability to remember a word.
Shakespeare invented over 1,700 words.
The words "race car" and "kayak" are palindromes.
The letter "Q" is the only letter that doesn't appear in any U.S. state name.
Cleopatra lived closer in time to the moon landing than to the construction of the Great Pyramid.
Oxford University is older than the Aztec Empire.
The Great Pyramid was built around 2560 BC, and Cleopatra lived around 30 BC.
The last execution by guillotine in France was in 1977.
The first pyramids were built before woolly mammoths went extinct.
Nintendo was founded in 1889, originally making playing cards.
The fax machine was invented in 1843, before the telephone.
The can opener was invented 48 years after the can.
The Titanic sank the same year the Oreo cookie was invented (1912).
Alaska was the last state to join the United States in 1959.
The Great Wall of China was built over many centuries, starting around 7th century BC.
Julius Caesar was kidnapped by pirates and held for ransom.
Napoleon was once attacked by a horde of bunnies.
Ancient Romans used urine to whiten their teeth.
Vikings used the bones of slain animals to make their weapons stronger.
The shortest war in history lasted 38 minutes (Britain vs. Zanzibar, 1896).
Ancient Egyptians used slabs of stone as pillows.
The oldest known customer complaint was written on a clay tablet in 1750 BC.
In ancient Rome, it was considered a sign of leadership to be born with a crooked nose.
The Roman Emperor Caligula made his horse a senator.
During World War II, a bear named Wojtek served in the Polish army.
The Dancing Plague of 1518 caused people to dance uncontrollably for days.
In Victorian England, it was fashionable to photograph the dead.
The Roman Empire and the Han Dynasty existed at the same time but never knew of each other.
Vikings discovered America 500 years before Columbus.
The Leaning Tower of Pisa has never been straight.
Mozart wrote his first symphony at age 8.
Benjamin Franklin never patented any of his inventions.
Abraham Lincoln is in the Wrestling Hall of Fame.
George Washington grew marijuana in his garden.
The inventor of the Pringles can is buried in one.
Walt Disney was afraid of mice.
Albert Einstein never wore socks.
Leonardo da Vinci could write with one hand and draw with the other at the same time.
Isaac Newton died a virgin.
Thomas Edison was afraid of the dark.
The first computer programmer was a woman named Ada Lovelace.
Nikola Tesla was a germaphobe and hated touching round objects.
Mark Twain was born during Halley's Comet and died during its next appearance.
Charles Darwin married his first cousin.
Baby carrots are just regular carrots cut into smaller pieces.
Lobsters were once considered prison food.
Canned food was invented 45 years before the can opener.
The inventor of the frisbee was turned into a frisbee after he died.
Bubble wrap was originally invented to be used as wallpaper.
Play-Doh was originally designed to clean wallpaper.
Silly Putty was accidentally invented by scientists trying to create synthetic rubber.
Velcro was invented after its creator noticed burrs sticking to his dog's fur.
The chainsaw was originally invented to assist with childbirth.
The treadmill was originally a punishment device for prisoners.
Ketchup was sold as medicine for indigestion in the 1830s.
Coca-Cola was originally green.
The microwave was invented after a researcher walked by a radar tube and a chocolate bar melted in his pocket.
The Slinky was invented by accident when an engineer dropped a spring.
Post-it Notes were invented by accident when a scientist was trying to create a super-strong adhesive.
Cornflakes were invented to reduce sexual desire.
Graham crackers were also invented to reduce sexual desire.
The Eiffel Tower was originally intended for Barcelona, but they rejected it.
The Statue of Liberty was originally intended to be in Egypt.
Big Ben is the name of the bell, not the clock tower (which is named Elizabeth Tower).
The Hollywood sign originally said "Hollywoodland".
The Golden Gate Bridge is not actually golden; it's international orange.
Mount Rushmore was never completed; the presidents were supposed to be depicted from the waist up.
The Leaning Tower of Pisa took almost 200 years to build.
The Sydney Opera House took 14 years to build and was 10 years behind schedule.
The Empire State Building was built in just 410 days.
The Hoover Dam contains enough concrete to build a two-lane highway from San Francisco to New York.
The Pentagon has twice as many bathrooms as necessary because of segregation laws when it was built.
There are more public libraries than McDonald's in the U.S.
The White House has 132 rooms, 35 bathrooms, and 6 levels.
The Burj Khalifa in Dubai is so tall you can watch two sunsets in one day.
There's a basketball court on the top floor of the U.S. Supreme Court building.
The Great Wall of China is held together with sticky rice mortar.
The Colosseum could be filled or emptied in 15 minutes.
The Panama Canal connects the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.
The Channel Tunnel between England and France is 31 miles long.
The longest bridge in the world is the Danyang–Kunshan Grand Bridge in China at 102 miles.
The tallest building in the world is the Burj Khalifa at 2,722 feet.
The deepest hole ever dug is the Kola Superdeep Borehole in Russia at 7.5 miles deep.
The longest road in the world is the Pan-American Highway at about 19,000 miles.
Otters hold hands while sleeping so they don't drift apart.
A group of pugs is called a "grumble".
Cows have best friends and get stressed when separated.
Squirrels plant thousands of new trees each year by forgetting where they buried their acorns.
Penguins propose to their mates with a pebble.
Sea otters have a pocket of skin under their forearms to store their favorite rock.
Dolphins have names for each other.
Elephants can recognize themselves in mirrors.
Rats laugh when tickled.
Butterflies taste with their feet.
A flamingo can only eat when its head is upside down.
Sloths can hold their breath longer than dolphins.
A snail can sleep for three years.
Gorillas can catch human colds and other illnesses.
Tigers have striped skin, not just striped fur.
A group of ferrets is called a "business".
Honeybees can recognize human faces.
Crows can hold grudges against specific people.
Pigs are smarter than dogs.
Octopuses have three hearts and blue blood.
A mantis shrimp can punch with the force of a bullet.
Hummingbirds are the only birds that can fly backwards.
A woodpecker's tongue wraps around its brain to protect it.
Owls can't move their eyeballs.
A flea can jump 200 times its own height.
Giraffes have the same number of neck vertebrae as humans (7).
A blue whale's heart is the size of a small car.
Komodo dragons can reproduce without a mate.
Male seahorses give birth, not females.
A group of jellyfish is called a "smack".
Turkeys can blush when they're excited or scared.
A duck's quack does echo, contrary to popular myth.
Horses can't vomit.
A goldfish's memory lasts for months, not seconds.
Platypuses don't have stomachs.
Cheetahs can't roar, but they can purr.
Polar bears have black skin under their white fur.
A grizzly bear's bite is strong enough to crush a bowling ball.
Reindeer eyes turn blue in winter.
Armadillos always give birth to identical quadruplets.
A pig's orgasm lasts 30 minutes.
Hippos can run faster than humans on land.
Kangaroos can't walk backwards.
A bat can eat up to 1,000 insects per hour.
Axolotls can regenerate their limbs, spinal cord, heart, and other organs.
Tardigrades can survive in space.
The immortal jellyfish can reverse its aging process.
A chameleon's tongue is twice the length of its body.
Butterflies have taste sensors on their feet.
Mosquitoes are attracted to people who just ate bananas.
Dragonflies have six legs but can't walk.
Ants never sleep.
Bees can recognize human faces.
A cockroach can live for weeks without its head.
Spiders don't have muscles in their legs; they move using hydraulic pressure.
Lobsters don't age and can theoretically live forever.
The longest living animal is a type of clam called the ocean quahog, which can live over 500 years.
A blue whale's tongue weighs as much as an elephant.
Narwhal tusks are actually an inside-out tooth.
Electric eels can produce a shock of up to 600 volts.
The pistol shrimp can create a bubble that reaches 8,000°F.
There are more fake flamingos in the world than real ones.
A cat has 32 muscles in each ear.
Dogs' noses are wet to help absorb scent chemicals.
A group of ravens is called an "unkindness".
Koalas sleep up to 22 hours a day.
A giraffe's tongue is about 20 inches long and is black.
Chickens can remember over 100 different faces.
Pigeons can do math.
Zebras are black with white stripes, not white with black stripes.
A wolf's howl can be heard up to 10 miles away.
Beavers' teeth never stop growing.
A python can survive for up to two years without food.
Sharks existed before trees.
The mantis shrimp has the most complex eyes in the animal kingdom.
Hummingbirds can't walk or hop.
A group of pandas is called an "embarrassment".
Frogs can freeze solid and then thaw out and hop away.
Sea cucumbers can eject their internal organs to escape predators and regrow them later.
The Arctic tern migrates about 44,000 miles annually.
Parrots can live over 80 years.
A crocodile's bite is the strongest bite in the animal kingdom.
Salamanders can regenerate lost limbs.
Moose are excellent swimmers.
Hedgehogs are immune to snake venom.
A group of hedgehogs is called a "prickle".
Rabbits can't vomit.
Hares are born with fur and can see; rabbits are born blind and hairless.
A mole can dig a tunnel 300 feet long in a single night.
Meerkats have a dedicated babysitter in their group.
Prairie dogs greet each other with kisses.
Otters have the densest fur of any animal.
Wolves mate for life.
Baby elephants suck their trunks for comfort, like human babies suck their thumbs.
Tigers' stripes are unique like human fingerprints.
Lions sleep up to 20 hours a day.
Leopards can carry prey twice their weight up a tree.
Jaguars have the strongest bite of any big cat relative to their size.
Snow leopards can't roar.
Cheetahs purr like house cats.
A pride of lions consists mostly of females.
Male lions' manes grow darker as they age.
Hyenas have one of the strongest bites in the animal kingdom.
African wild dogs have a 80% hunting success rate, the highest of any predator.
Honey badgers are immune to cobra venom.
Wolverines can take down prey much larger than themselves.
Weasels do a "war dance" when hunting.
Ferrets were domesticated over 2,500 years ago.
Raccoons can remember solutions to tasks for up to three years.
Bears have an excellent sense of smell, better than dogs.
Sloths only defecate once a week.
Capybaras are the world's largest rodents.
Beavers can hold their breath for 15 minutes underwater.
Otters use tools to crack open shellfish.
Dolphins sleep with one eye open.
Whales can't breathe through their mouths.
A blue whale's heartbeat can be detected from two miles away.
Orcas are actually dolphins, not whales.
Beluga whales' necks are flexible, unlike other whales.
Sperm whales can dive over 7,000 feet deep.
Manatees are related to elephants.
Dugongs are thought to have inspired mermaid legends.
Walruses can suck prey out of their shells.
Seals can sleep underwater and surface for air without waking.
Sea lions can dance to a beat.
Penguins can drink saltwater.
Emperor penguins can dive deeper than any other bird.
Puffins mate for life.
Albatrosses can fly for years without touching land.
Ostriches have the largest eyes of any land animal.
Kiwi birds are nearly blind.
Cassowaries are considered the world's most dangerous bird.
Eagles can see fish from up to a mile away.
Bald eagles aren't actually bald.
Vultures have extremely acidic stomach acid to digest rotting meat.
Flamingos get their pink color from the food they eat.
Peacocks are males; females are called peahens.
A peacock's tail feathers account for 60% of its body length.
Hummingbirds beat their wings up to 80 times per second.
Woodpeckers' tongues wrap around their skulls.
Parrots name their babies.
Crows can recognize individual human faces and hold grudges.
Ravens can learn to mimic human speech.
Magpies can recognize themselves in mirrors.
Blue jays can imitate hawk calls to scare other birds away.
Cardinals mate for life.
Robins can see magnetic fields.
Owls can rotate their heads 270 degrees.
Barn owls can hunt in complete darkness using only sound.
Pelicans can hold up to 3 gallons of water in their beaks.
Toucan beaks are made of hollow bone and keratin.
Kingfishers can see underwater.
Swans mate for life and can die of heartbreak.
Ducks have three eyelids.
Geese fly in a V formation to conserve energy.
Chickens are the closest living relatives to Tyrannosaurus rex.
Turkeys can have heart attacks; they died from shock after the U.S. Air Force broke the sound barrier.
Quails can remember up to 100 different faces.
Pigeons can find their way home from over 1,000 miles away.
Pigeons can detect earthquakes before they happen.
Bats are the only mammals that can fly.
Vampire bats have an anti-coagulant in their saliva.
Fruit bats are important pollinators.
Bats eat up to 1,000 insects per hour.
A bat's wing is similar to a human hand.
Some bats can live over 30 years.
Bats navigate using echolocation.
The bumblebee bat is the world's smallest mammal.
Flying foxes are bats, not foxes.
Bats can detect temperature changes of 0.036°F.
Japan is made up of over 6,800 islands.
Canada has the longest coastline in the world.
Vatican City is the smallest country in the world.
Monaco is the most densely populated country.
Mongolia is the least densely populated country.
Russia spans 11 time zones.
France has the most time zones (12, including territories).
Australia is wider than the moon.
Africa is the only continent in all four hemispheres.
The Amazon rainforest produces 20% of the world's oxygen.
The Nile is the longest river in the world.
The Amazon is the largest river by volume.
Lake Superior is the largest freshwater lake by surface area.
The Caspian Sea is the largest inland body of water.
The Dead Sea is 9 times saltier than the ocean.
The Mariana Trench is the deepest part of the ocean at 36,000 feet.
Mount Everest is the tallest mountain above sea level.
Mauna Kea in Hawaii is the tallest mountain from base to peak.
The Andes is the longest mountain range.
The Himalayas are still growing.
Antarctica is the driest, windiest, and coldest continent.
Antarctica has no permanent residents.
The Antarctic ice sheet contains 70% of the world's fresh water.
The Arctic has no land, only ice.
Iceland has no mosquitoes.
New Zealand has no native land mammals.
Madagascar has unique wildlife found nowhere else.
The Galápagos Islands inspired Darwin's theory of evolution.
Easter Island's famous statues are called moai.
The Bermuda Triangle is roughly 500,000 square miles.
The Sahara Desert is about the size of the United States.
The Gobi Desert is expanding.
The Atacama Desert in Chile is the driest place on Earth.
Death Valley is the hottest place on Earth.
Oymyakon, Russia is the coldest inhabited place on Earth.
The longest place name in the world is Taumatawhakatangihangakoauauotamateaturipukakapikimaungahoronukupokaiwhenuakitanatahu in New Zealand (85 letters).
The shortest place name is Å in Norway.
There's a town in Norway called Hell.
There's a town in Austria called Fucking (now changed to Fugging).
Turkey is in both Europe and Asia.
Russia is in both Europe and Asia.
Egypt is in both Africa and Asia.
Istanbul is the only city in two continents.
Dubai has the tallest building, largest shopping mall, and tallest hotel.
Singapore is both a city and a country.
Hong Kong has more skyscrapers than any other city.
Venice is built on 118 islands.
Amsterdam has more canals than Venice.
Lagos, Nigeria has more people than New York City.
Tokyo is the most populous metropolitan area.
The Great Barrier Reef is the world's largest living structure.
The Great Barrier Reef can be seen from space.
Coral reefs cover less than 1% of the ocean floor but support 25% of marine life.
The ocean contains 20 million tons of gold.
The ocean is 5% explored.
The Pacific Ocean is larger than all land on Earth combined.
The Atlantic Ocean is saltier than the Pacific.
The Gulf Stream is like a river in the ocean.
The Arctic Ocean is the smallest and shallowest ocean.
The Southern Ocean is the newest ocean (defined in 2000).
Icebergs in the Arctic are mostly from glaciers; in Antarctica, from ice shelves.
90% of an iceberg is underwater.
The largest iceberg ever recorded was larger than Jamaica.
Fresh water freezes at 32°F; salt water freezes at about 28°F.
Water is the only substance less dense as a solid than as a liquid.
Hot water freezes faster than cold water (Mpemba effect).
Water can boil and freeze at the same time (triple point).
Superheated water can reach 374°F before boiling.
A water molecule can spend over 3,000 years in the ocean before evaporating.
The water you drink is billions of years old.
The water in your body has been through multiple people throughout history.
Lightning creates ozone.
A single lightning bolt contains enough energy to toast 100,000 slices of bread.
Lightning can heat the air to 50,000°F.
Thunder is the sound of air expanding rapidly.
You can tell how far away lightning is by counting seconds between flash and thunder.
Tornadoes can have wind speeds over 300 mph.
The largest tornado ever recorded was 2.6 miles wide.
Hurricanes rotate counterclockwise in the Northern Hemisphere and clockwise in the Southern.
The eye of a hurricane is calm.
Hurricanes can last for weeks.
A hurricane releases the energy of 10,000 nuclear bombs.
Snow is translucent, not white.
No two snowflakes are exactly alike.
Snowflakes always have six sides.
The largest snowflake ever recorded was 15 inches wide and 8 inches thick.
Thundersnow is when it snows during a thunderstorm.
Graupel is soft hail.
Hail can fall at speeds over 100 mph.
The largest hailstone was 8 inches in diameter.
Raindrops are shaped like hamburger buns, not teardrops.
Rain has a smell called petrichor.
It can rain diamonds on Jupiter and Saturn.
It rains sulfuric acid on Venus.
Mars has dust storms that can cover the entire planet.
Mars has the largest volcano in the solar system (Olympus Mons).
A day on Jupiter is less than 10 hours.
Jupiter has 79 known moons.
Saturn's rings are made of billions of ice particles.
You could fit all the planets between Earth and the moon.
The sun makes up 99.86% of the solar system's mass.
The sun is a medium-sized star.
The sun is 4.6 billion years old.
The sun will live for another 5 billion years.
The sun's core temperature is 27 million°F.
It takes 8 minutes for sunlight to reach Earth.
The sun's gravity is 28 times stronger than Earth's.
Solar flares can disrupt satellites and power grids.
The sun rotates faster at its equator than at its poles.
The sun is slowly getting hotter.
In 1 billion years, the sun will be too hot for life on Earth.
The moon is moving away from Earth at 1.5 inches per year.
The moon causes tides on Earth.
The moon has no atmosphere.
The moon's surface temperature ranges from -280°F to 260°F.
The moon has "moonquakes".
There's water ice on the moon.
The dark spots on the moon are called maria (seas).
The same side of the moon always faces Earth.
The moon is about 1/4 the size of Earth.
A lunar day lasts about 29.5 Earth days.
The moon affects Earth's rotation speed.
Without the moon, Earth's days would be 6-8 hours long.
The moon stabilizes Earth's tilt.
There's no wind on the moon, so footprints last forever.
The moon has less than 1% of Earth's mass.
The moon is drifting away; eventually there will be no more total solar eclipses.
Mercury has no moons.
Venus has no moons.
Mars has two tiny moons named Phobos and Deimos.
Jupiter's moon Europa might have an ocean under its ice.
Saturn's moon Titan has lakes of liquid methane.
Saturn's moon Enceladus shoots geysers of water into space.
Uranus is tilted on its side at 98 degrees.
Uranus has 27 known moons.
Neptune has the fastest winds in the solar system.
Neptune's moon Triton orbits backward.
Pluto has five moons.
Pluto's largest moon Charon is half the size of Pluto.
Pluto takes 248 Earth years to orbit the sun.
A year on Pluto is longer than Pluto has been known.
There are five dwarf planets in our solar system.
The asteroid belt is between Mars and Jupiter.
Most asteroids are in the asteroid belt.
Some asteroids have their own moons.
Comets are made of ice and dust.
Comets' tails always point away from the sun.
Halley's Comet appears every 76 years.
The next appearance of Halley's Comet will be in 2061.
Meteors are often called shooting stars.
Most meteors burn up in the atmosphere.
Meteorites are meteors that reach Earth's surface.
The largest meteorite ever found weighs 60 tons.
A meteorite impact likely killed the dinosaurs.
The Chicxulub crater in Mexico is from that impact.
The impact was equivalent to 10 billion atomic bombs.
The dinosaurs went extinct 66 million years ago.
Birds are descendants of dinosaurs.
Chickens are the closest living relatives to T. rex.
T. rex lived closer in time to us than to Stegosaurus.
The Stegosaurus had a brain the size of a walnut.
The largest dinosaur was the Argentinosaurus.
The smallest dinosaur was about the size of a chicken.
Some dinosaurs had feathers.
Velociraptors were about the size of a turkey.
The Brachiosaurus was as tall as a 4-story building.
The Spinosaurus was larger than T. rex and could swim.
Dinosaurs roamed Earth for 165 million years.
Humans have existed for about 200,000 years.
Homo sapiens and Neanderthals coexisted.
Neanderthals went extinct about 40,000 years ago.
Humans share 98.8% of their DNA with chimpanzees.
Humans share 50% of their DNA with bananas.
Every human has a unique fingerprint.
Every human has a unique tongue print.
Every human has unique iris patterns.
No two people have the same voiceprint.
Identical twins have different fingerprints.
Your fingerprints form in the womb.
You have about 100 billion neurons in your brain.
Your brain generates about 20 watts of electricity.
Your brain is about 60% fat.
Your brain can process information faster than the speed of light.
Actually, no, your brain processes info at about 268 mph, much slower than light.
You use all of your brain, not just 10%.
Your brain can't feel pain.
Brain freeze happens when cold hits the roof of your mouth.
Yawning cools down your brain.
You yawn more when you're tired or bored.
Yawning is contagious because of mirror neurons.
Humans are the only animals that cry emotional tears.
Emotional tears have different chemical composition than reflex tears.
Crying can reduce stress by releasing hormones.
The average person cries about 5 times a month.
Women cry more than men (on average).
Babies don't produce tears until they're about 1-3 months old.
Your eyes can see about 10 million different colors.
Color blindness affects about 8% of men and 0.5% of women.
Blue eyes are a genetic mutation.
All blue-eyed people share a common ancestor.
Brown eyes are the most common eye color.
Green is the rarest eye color.
Heterochromia is when someone has two different colored eyes.
Your eyes can adjust from seeing a dim star to bright sunlight.
Your eyes have about 7 million cones and 100 million rods.
Rods detect light; cones detect color.
You blink about 20,000 times a day.
Each blink lasts about 0.3 seconds.
You spend about 10% of your waking hours with your eyes closed due to blinking.
Your eyelashes last about 150 days before falling out.
You have about 200 eyelashes per eye.
Your eyes are always the same size from birth (mostly true).
Your eyes can get sunburned.
Reading in dim light doesn't damage your eyes, but causes strain.
Carrots don't improve your eyesight (unless you're vitamin A deficient).
The "carrot myth" was WWII propaganda.
Your nose can detect about 1 trillion different scents.
Your sense of smell is 10,000 times more sensitive than your sense of taste.
Smell is the strongest sense tied to memory.
You can't smell while you're sleeping.
Your sense of smell decreases with age.
Women have a better sense of smell than men.
Your nose produces about 1 liter of mucus per day.
Snot is mostly water.
The color of snot can indicate health status.
You can't breathe and swallow at the same time.
You can't hum while holding your nose.
Your tongue has about 10,000 taste buds.
Taste buds regenerate every 10-14 days.
There are five basic tastes: sweet, sour, salty, bitter, and umami.
The tongue map (different areas for different tastes) is a myth.
All areas of the tongue can taste all flavors.
Your tongue is the strongest muscle relative to its size.
Your tongue is unique like a fingerprint.
The longest tongue ever recorded was 3.97 inches.
Your tongue has eight muscles.
A person's tongue print can be used for identification.
The average person produces 25,000 quarts of saliva in a lifetime.
Saliva helps you taste food.
Saliva contains natural painkillers called opiorphin.
Your ears never stop growing.
Your ears produce more earwax when you're stressed.
Earwax is antibacterial.
Earwax can be dry or wet based on genetics.
Your ears can distinguish between 400,000 different sounds.
Your ears help you balance.
The smallest bone in your body is in your ear (stapes).
The three smallest bones are all in your ear.
You hear better with your right ear for speech.
You hear better with your left ear for music.
Loud noises can cause permanent hearing damage.
Ringing in the ears is called tinnitus.
Your ears are self-cleaning.
Q-tips can damage your ears.
Some people can wiggle their ears.
Your outer ear is called the pinna.
The spiral part of your inner ear is called the cochlea.
The eardrum is about 0.1 mm thick.
Your hair grows about 6 inches per year.
Hair is made of a protein called keratin.
The same protein makes up your nails.
Everyone has the same number of hair follicles.
Blondes have more hair follicles than brunettes and redheads.
Redheads have the thickest hair strands.
Hair is the second-fastest-growing tissue in the body (after bone marrow).
A single hair can support 3 ounces of weight.
A full head of hair can support 12 tons.
Hair is almost impossible to destroy.
The only things that can destroy hair are fire and strong acids.
Hair grows faster in warm weather.
Hair grows faster during the day than at night.
Stress can cause hair loss.
Male pattern baldness is inherited from the mother's side.
Shaving doesn't make hair grow back thicker.
Cutting hair doesn't make it grow faster.
Your fingernails grow about 3.5 mm per month.
Fingernails grow faster than toenails.
Nails grow faster on your dominant hand.
The middle fingernail grows the fastest.
Nails grow faster in summer than winter.
Nails grow faster in young people than old people.
White spots on nails are usually from minor trauma, not calcium deficiency.
Hangnails aren't actually nails; they're torn skin.
Biting your nails can lead to infections.
The lunula is the white half-moon at the base of your nail.
Your nails can show signs of health problems.
Vertical ridges on nails are usually normal aging.
Horizontal ridges can indicate illness or injury.
Yellow nails can be from fungus or smoking.
Your skin replaces itself about every 28 days.
You shed about 30,000-40,000 dead skin cells per minute.
Dust in your house is mostly dead skin cells.
Your skin is your largest organ.
Your skin accounts for about 15% of your body weight.
The average adult has about 8 pounds of skin.
Your skin has about 300 million skin cells.
Your skin is thickest on your feet.
Your skin is thinnest on your eyelids.
Your skin has three layers: epidermis, dermis, and hypodermis.
Goosebumps are caused by tiny muscles contracting.
Goosebumps are a vestigial reflex from when we had more body hair.
Your skin can absorb some substances.
Wrinkles are caused by collagen breakdown.
Sun damage causes most wrinkles.
Smoking accelerates skin aging.
Your skin produces vitamin D when exposed to sunlight.
You need about 10-15 minutes of sun exposure for vitamin D.
Too much sun causes skin cancer.
Melanin protects skin from UV damage.
Freckles are clusters of melanin.
Moles are clusters of melanocytes (melanin-producing cells).
Birthmarks are either vascular or pigmented.
Your skin has about 1,000 species of bacteria.
Most skin bacteria are harmless or beneficial.
Your bellybutton has a unique ecosystem of bacteria.
Your bellybutton can harbor over 2,000 different species of bacteria.
Innies are more common than outties.
Your bellybutton type is random, not genetic.
Your heart beats about 100,000 times per day.
Your heart pumps about 2,000 gallons of blood per day.
Your heart started beating about 3 weeks after conception.
Your heart will beat about 3 billion times in your lifetime.
A woman's heart beats faster than a man's.
Your heart can keep beating outside your body.
Heart disease is the leading cause of death worldwide.
Laughing is good for your heart.
Broken heart syndrome is real; stress can damage your heart.
Your heart has its own electrical system.
The "lub-dub" sound is valves closing.
Heart attacks are more common on Monday mornings.
Heart attacks are more common in winter.
Your heart is about the size of your fist.
Your heart is slightly left of center, not on the left side.
Blue whales have the largest hearts, weighing about 400 pounds.
A shrimp's heart is in its head.
Octopuses have three hearts.
Earthworms have five hearts.
Cockroaches have multiple hearts (13 chambers).
Your blood type is determined by antigens on red blood cells.
O negative is the universal donor blood type.
AB positive is the universal recipient.
Mosquitoes prefer people with type O blood.
Your blood makes up about 7-8% of your body weight.
The average adult has about 1.5 gallons of blood.
Your body makes 2 million red blood cells per second.
Red blood cells live for about 120 days.
White blood cells fight infection.
Platelets help blood clot.
Plasma is the liquid part of blood.
Your bone marrow produces blood cells.
You have about 206 bones as an adult.
Babies are born with about 300 bones.
Many baby bones fuse together as you grow.
The femur is the longest bone in your body.
The stapes (in your ear) is the smallest bone.
Your bones are stronger than steel.
Your bones are about 31% water.
Your bones contain 99% of your body's calcium.
Bones are constantly being broken down and rebuilt.
Bone is alive and has blood vessels.
Broken bones can heal themselves.
Your skull has 22 bones.
Your hands have 27 bones each.
Your feet have 26 bones each.
Your hands and feet contain over half your bones.
Your spine has 33 vertebrae.
You're taller in the morning than at night.
Gravity compresses your spine during the day.
Astronauts grow taller in space.
Your teeth are not bones; they're made of enamel.
Tooth enamel is the hardest substance in your body.
Baby teeth are also called deciduous teeth.
Adults have 32 teeth (including wisdom teeth).
Children have 20 baby teeth.
Some people never get wisdom teeth.
Wisdom teeth are vestigial; we don't need them.
Your teeth are unique like fingerprints.
Your teeth can show your age.
Teeth can't heal themselves like bones.
Cavities are caused by bacteria eating sugar and producing acid.
Fluoride strengthens tooth enamel.
The hardest part of your tooth is the enamel.
Dentin is under the enamel.
The pulp contains nerves and blood vessels.
Your teeth start developing before you're born.
Shark teeth regrow; human teeth don't.
Sharks can have up to 50,000 teeth in their lifetime.
Rodents' teeth never stop growing.
Elephants go through six sets of teeth in their lifetime.
Your stomach acid can dissolve metal.
Your stomach gets a new lining every 3-4 days.
Without this lining, your stomach would digest itself.
Your stomach can hold about a liter of food.
Your stomach growls when it's empty and contracting.
The growling is called borborygmi.
You can live without a stomach.
Your small intestine is about 20 feet long.
Your large intestine is about 5 feet long.
Most nutrient absorption happens in the small intestine.
Your appendix may help with immunity.
You can live without your appendix.
Appendicitis is when the appendix becomes inflamed.
Your liver is the largest internal organ.
Your liver has over 500 functions.
Your liver can regenerate itself.
You can donate part of your liver and it will grow back.
The liver filters about 1.5 liters of blood per minute.
Your liver stores vitamins and minerals.
Your liver produces bile to digest fat.
Your gallbladder stores bile.
You can live without a gallbladder.
Gallstones are hardened bile deposits.
Your pancreas produces insulin and digestive enzymes.
Type 1 diabetes is when the pancreas doesn't produce insulin.
Type 2 diabetes is when cells become resistant to insulin.
Your kidneys filter about 50 gallons of blood per day.
Your kidneys produce urine to remove waste.
You have two kidneys but can live with one.
Each kidney has about 1 million nephrons.
Your bladder can hold about 2 cups of urine.
Urine is sterile (mostly).
The color of urine indicates hydration level.
Clear urine means you're well-hydrated.
Dark urine means you need more water.
Asparagus makes urine smell due to asparagusic acid.
Only some people can smell asparagus in urine.
The ability to smell asparagus in urine is genetic and not everyone can detect it.
Your immune system fights infections.
Your immune system has a memory.
Vaccines train your immune system.
Fevers help fight infections.
Inflammation is part of immune response.
Allergies are immune system overreactions.
Autoimmune diseases are when your immune system attacks your body.
Your thymus produces T-cells for immunity.
Your thymus shrinks as you age.
Your spleen filters blood and fights infection.
You can live without a spleen, but you're more prone to infection.
Your lymph nodes filter lymph fluid.
Swollen lymph nodes usually indicate infection.
Your tonsils help fight infection.
Tonsillitis is when tonsils become infected.
You can live without your tonsils.
Your adenoids also help fight infection.
Adenoids typically shrink after childhood.
Stress weakens your immune system.
Sleep strengthens your immune system.
Exercise boosts your immune system.
Vitamin C supports immune function.
Zinc supports immune function.
Your nervous system controls your body.
Your brain and spinal cord are your central nervous system.
Nerves throughout your body are the peripheral nervous system.
Neurons transmit electrical signals.
Your spinal cord is about 18 inches long.
Reflexes bypass the brain and go through the spinal cord.
Reflexes bypass the brain and travel through the spinal cord, which is why they happen so fast.
Pain signals travel to the brain at 300 feet per second.
Touch signals travel at 250 feet per second.
Neurons can transmit signals at over 200 mph.
You have about 100 billion neurons.
Each neuron can connect to 10,000 other neurons.
Neurotransmitters carry signals between neurons.
Dopamine is associated with pleasure and reward.
Serotonin regulates mood, sleep, and appetite.
Endorphins are natural painkillers.
Adrenaline prepares your body for "fight or flight".
Cortisol is the stress hormone.
Melatonin regulates sleep.
Oxytocin is the "love hormone".
Your hormones regulate many body functions.
The endocrine system produces hormones.
Your pituitary gland is the "master gland".
Your hypothalamus regulates the pituitary gland.
Your thyroid regulates metabolism.
Hyperthyroidism is an overactive thyroid.
Hypothyroidism is an underactive thyroid.
Your adrenal glands produce adrenaline and cortisol.
Your ovaries produce estrogen and progesterone (in females).
Your testes produce testosterone (in males).
Hormones affect mood, energy, and growth.
Puberty is triggered by hormones.
Menopause is when estrogen production decreases.
Testosterone levels decrease with age in men.
Growth hormone promotes growth.
Too much growth hormone causes gigantism.
Too little growth hormone causes dwarfism.
Insulin regulates blood sugar.
The average human body contains enough carbon to make 900 pencils.
The average human body contains enough iron to make a 3-inch nail.
Your body produces about a million new skin cells every 40 minutes.
The average person will spend about 6 months of their life waiting for traffic lights to turn green.
Your body has enough phosphorus to make 220 matches.
Your body has enough sulfur to kill all fleas on an average dog.
Your body has enough potassium to fire a toy cannon.
Your body has enough lime to whitewash a chicken coop.
The average person will walk past 36 murderers in their lifetime.
The average person spends about 2 weeks of their life waiting for traffic lights.
The average pencil can draw a line 35 miles long.
The average ballpoint pen can draw a line 2 miles long.
The average person will spend 6 months of their life in the bathroom.
The average person will spend 2 years on the phone.
The average person will spend 5 years eating.
The average person will spend 3 months on the toilet.
The average person will spend 2 weeks kissing in their lifetime.
There are more stars in the universe than grains of sand on all of Earth's beaches.
A teaspoonful of neutron star would weigh 6 billion tons.
The footprints on the moon will be there for 100 million years.
The sun loses 4 million tons of mass every second from fusion.
Neutron stars can spin 600 times per second.
Black holes aren't actually holes; they're extremely dense objects.
The gravity near a black hole is so strong that time slows down.
If you fell into a black hole, you'd be "spaghettified".
Light cannot escape from a black hole.
The nearest black hole is about 1,000 light-years away.
The supermassive black hole at the center of the Milky Way is called Sagittarius A*.
Sagittarius A* is 4 million times the mass of the sun.
Most galaxies have a supermassive black hole at their center.
There are about 2 trillion galaxies in the observable universe.
The Milky Way and Andromeda galaxies are on a collision course.
The Milky Way and Andromeda galaxies are on a collision course and will merge in about 4.5 billion years.
The universe is expanding faster than the speed of light.
The universe is about 93 billion light-years in diameter.
We can only see about 5% of the universe; the rest is dark matter and dark energy.
Dark matter doesn't emit light but has gravity.
Dark energy is causing the universe to expand faster.
The Big Bang happened about 13.8 billion years ago.
The cosmic microwave background is leftover radiation from the Big Bang.
The universe is flat, not curved.
If the universe is infinite, there could be infinite copies of you.
The multiverse theory suggests there are infinite parallel universes.
Quantum mechanics says particles can be in two places at once.
Schrödinger's cat is a thought experiment about quantum superposition.
Quantum entanglement means particles can affect each other instantly across any distance.
Einstein called quantum entanglement "spooky action at a distance".
Heisenberg's uncertainty principle says you can't know both position and momentum perfectly.
Light behaves as both a wave and a particle.
Photons are particles of light.
Light has no mass.
Light always travels at the same speed in a vacuum (186,282 miles per second).
Nothing can travel faster than light.
Time slows down as you approach the speed of light.
If you traveled at the speed of light, time would stop for you.
GPS satellites account for time dilation due to relativity.
Gravity bends space and time.
The stronger the gravity, the slower time passes.
You age slower on a mountaintop than in a valley.
Time travel to the future is theoretically possible.
Time travel to the past creates paradoxes.
Wormholes could theoretically allow time travel.
Wormholes have never been observed.
White holes are theoretical opposites of black holes.
A white hole would expel matter instead of sucking it in.
White holes have never been observed.
The arrow of time is why we remember the past but not the future.
Entropy (disorder) always increases over time.
The fact that entropy always increases is called the second law of thermodynamics.
The heat death of the universe is when entropy reaches maximum.
The heat death of the universe — when entropy reaches maximum — would occur in approximately 10^100 years.
By then, all stars will have died.
The last stars will die in about 100 trillion years.
Red dwarfs will be the last stars burning.
White dwarfs are dead stars that have stopped fusing.
Neutron stars are the collapsed cores of massive stars.
Supernovas create most elements heavier than iron.
You are made of stardust; your atoms were forged in stars.
Every atom in your body is billions of years old.
The calcium in your bones came from dying stars.
The iron in your blood came from supernovas.
The oxygen you breathe came from stars.
We are literally made of star material.
Carl Sagan said, "We are a way for the cosmos to know itself".
There are more atoms in a glass of water than glasses of water in all the oceans.
Atoms are 99.9999999999996% empty space.
If an atom were the size of a football stadium, the nucleus would be a pea in the center.
Electrons orbit the nucleus at nearly the speed of light.
Atoms never actually touch; electromagnetic forces keep them apart.
When you touch something, you're feeling electromagnetic repulsion.
Atoms are eternal; they're recycled over and over.
The atoms in your body have been through many other living things.
You might have atoms that were once in dinosaurs, Cleopatra, or Shakespeare.
Atoms in your left hand might have come from different stars than atoms in your right hand.
Gold is created in neutron star collisions.
All the gold on Earth came from space.
A cubic meter of gold weighs 19,300 kg (about 42,500 lbs).
Gold is so malleable you can hammer it into sheets 1 atom thick.
Gold never tarnishes or corrodes.
Gold is edible and sometimes used in food.
There's gold in your body (about 0.2 milligrams).
Diamond is the hardest natural material.
Diamonds are made of carbon.
Graphite (in pencils) is also pure carbon.
The difference is how the atoms are arranged.
Diamonds form under extreme pressure deep underground.
Most diamonds are over 1 billion years old.
Diamonds are brought to the surface by volcanic eruptions.
Synthetic diamonds are chemically identical to natural ones.
You can turn peanut butter into diamonds with enough pressure.
You can turn a pencil into diamonds with enough heat and pressure.
It rains diamonds on Neptune and Uranus.
A diamond planet was discovered in 2012.
Glass is technically a liquid, not a solid (supercooled liquid).
Actually, glass is an amorphous solid, not a liquid.
The "glass flows over time" claim is a myth.
Sand is the main ingredient in glass.
Glass can be recycled infinitely without loss of quality.
Glass takes 1 million years to decompose.
Obsidian is natural glass formed from volcanic lava.
Fulgurites are glass tubes formed when lightning hits sand.
Glass is transparent because its atoms are arranged in a way that lets light pass through.
Bulletproof glass is actually layers of glass and plastic.
Bulletproof glass is more accurately called bullet-resistant.
Gorilla Glass is used in most smartphones.
Prince Rupert's Drops are incredibly strong glass teardrops.
Prince Rupert's Drops are so strong you can hit them with a hammer, but snapping their tail causes them to shatter explosively.
Glass can be made from many materials, not just sand.
Fiberglass is glass fibers used for insulation and reinforcement.
Optical fibers transmit data as light through glass.
The internet relies on fiber optic cables under the ocean.
The first transatlantic telegraph cable was laid in 1858.
The first phone call was made in 1876 by Alexander Graham Bell.
The first email was sent in 1971.
The @ symbol was chosen for email because it was rarely used.
The first text message was sent in 1992.
The first text message said "Merry Christmas".
The first camera phone was sold in 2000.
The first iPhone was released in 2007.
The first website is still online.
The first YouTube video was uploaded in 2005.
The video was called "Me at the zoo".
The first item sold on eBay was a broken laser pointer.
The first purchase on Amazon was a book.
Amazon was originally called "Cadabra".
Google was originally called "BackRub".
Google's name comes from "googol" (10^100).
Yahoo stands for "Yet Another Hierarchical Officious Oracle".
The Twitter bird is named Larry.
YouTube was created by three former PayPal employees.
Facebook was originally called "Thefacebook".
Facebook's "Like" button was almost called "Awesome".
Instagram was originally called "Burbn".
Snapchat was originally called "Picaboo".
Netflix was founded before Google.
Netflix originally mailed DVDs.
Netflix was started because the founder got a late fee from Blockbuster.
Blockbuster had a chance to buy Netflix for $50 million and declined.
The first computer bug was an actual moth stuck in a computer.
The term "bug" for glitches existed before this, but the moth made it famous.
The first computer programmer was Ada Lovelace in the 1840s.
The first electronic computer was ENIAC, built in 1945.
ENIAC weighed 30 tons.
The first personal computer was the Altair 8800 in 1975.
The first Apple computer was sold for $666.66.
Apple's first logo showed Isaac Newton under a tree.
IBM's first hard drive weighed over a ton and stored 5 MB.
A modern smartphone has more computing power than all of NASA in 1969.
The first 1GB hard drive cost $40,000 and weighed 550 pounds.
Today you can buy 1TB (1,000 GB) on a thumb drive for $20.
Moore's Law states that computing power doubles every two years.
The first computer mouse was made of wood.
The computer mouse was invented in 1964.
The first computer with a GUI (graphical interface) was the Xerox Alto in 1973.
Apple popularized the GUI with the Macintosh in 1984.
The "Save" icon is a floppy disk, which most young people have never seen.
Floppy disks aren't actually floppy (except the 5.25" ones).
CDs hold about 700 MB of data.
DVDs hold about 4.7 GB.
Blu-ray discs hold about 25 GB.
The PlayStation 2 is the best-selling game console of all time.
Tetris is the best-selling video game of all time.
Minecraft is the best-selling video game of all time by copies sold.
The first video game was "Tennis for Two" in 1958.
Pong was one of the first commercially successful video games (1972).
Pac-Man was originally called "Puck-Man".
The name was changed because "Puck" could be vandalized to spell a bad word.
The original name of Pac-Man in Japan was "Pakkuman".
Mario was originally called "Jumpman".
Mario is named after the landlord of Nintendo's first warehouse in America.
Luigi is named after a pizza parlor near Nintendo's offices.
Donkey Kong was named because the creator thought "donkey" meant "stupid" in English.
Sonic the Hedgehog was created to compete with Mario.
The original PlayStation was supposed to be a Nintendo console.
Nintendo and Sony had a partnership that fell apart.
After Nintendo and Sony's deal collapsed, Sony created the PlayStation as a direct competitor to Nintendo.
The Xbox was named because it uses DirectX technology.
The first Xbox controller was nicknamed "The Duke" and was huge.
Nintendo was founded in 1889 as a playing card company.
SEGA used to make arcade games before consoles.
Atari created Pong and the Atari 2600.
The video game crash of 1983 nearly killed the industry.
Nintendo saved the industry with the NES in 1985.
The NES was called the Famicom in Japan.
Super Mario Bros. came bundled with the NES.
The Konami Code (up up down down left right left right B A) originated in Contra.
The Konami Code has appeared in hundreds of games and websites.
Leeroy Jenkins is a famous World of Warcraft meme.
The cake is a lie (Portal reference).
"All your base are belong to us" is a famous mistranslation from Zero Wing.
The "?" block in Mario was originally going to be blank.
Shigeru Miyamoto created Mario, Zelda, and Donkey Kong.
Hideo Kojima created Metal Gear and is known for long cutscenes.
Gabe Newell founded Valve and created Half-Life.
Half-Life 3 has been highly anticipated for over a decade.
Valve can't count to three (no Half-Life 3, Left 4 Dead 3, Portal 3, etc.).
Steam is the largest PC gaming platform.
Epic Games Store gives away free games every week.
Fortnite made over $5 billion in 2018.
Roblox has more active users than Minecraft.
Among Us became hugely popular in 2020.
Fall Guys also became popular in 2020.
Pokémon is the highest-grossing media franchise of all time.
There are over 1,000 Pokémon now.
The first Pokémon games were Red and Green in Japan.
Pikachu wasn't supposed to be the mascot; Clefairy was.
Ash's Pikachu is male.
Meowth is one of the few Pokémon that can speak.
Ditto can transform into any Pokémon.
MissingNo. is a famous glitch Pokémon.
Mew was secretly added to Pokémon Red/Blue at the last minute.
Pokémon means "Pocket Monsters" in Japanese.
Digimon stands for "Digital Monsters".
Yu-Gi-Oh! means "King of Games".
Dragon Ball Z inspired many anime and manga.
One Piece is the best-selling manga of all time.
Naruto has over 700 episodes.
Attack on Titan became a global phenomenon.
Studio Ghibli created Spirited Away, Totoro, and many classics.
Hayao Miyazaki is the co-founder of Studio Ghibli.
Spirited Away won an Oscar.
Anime is hand-drawn and computer animation from Japan.
The word "anime" is just the Japanese word for animation.
In Japan, all animation is called anime, including Disney.
The first anime was created in 1917.
Astro Boy (1963) was the first popular anime series.
Akira (1988) is considered a masterpiece.
Ghost in the Shell inspired The Matrix.
The Simpsons is the longest-running American sitcom.
The Simpsons has been on for over 30 years.
South Park episodes are made in about a week.
Rick and Morty is inspired by Back to the Future.
Family Guy was cancelled twice and brought back.
Futurama was cancelled and revived multiple times.
SpongeBob SquarePants was created by a marine biologist.
The voice of SpongeBob also voices the Ice King in Adventure Time.
Adventure Time ran for 10 seasons.
Avatar: The Last Airbender is considered one of the best animated series.
Avatar was not an anime but was heavily influenced by it.
The movie "The Last Airbender" is widely considered terrible.
The movie was directed by M. Night Shyamalan.
M. Night Shyamalan directed The Sixth Sense.
The Sixth Sense has a famous plot twist.
"I see dead people" is a famous quote from The Sixth Sense.
The Titanic movie was more expensive than the actual Titanic.
The Titanic movie won 11 Oscars.
James Cameron also directed Avatar.
Avatar is the highest-grossing film of all time (unadjusted for inflation).
Avengers: Endgame briefly held the record.
Avatar reclaimed the record after a re-release.
Gone with the Wind is the highest-grossing film adjusted for inflation.
The original Star Wars is #2 adjusted for inflation.
Star Wars was originally expected to flop.
George Lucas made most of his money from merchandise, not the films.
The phrase "Luke, I am your father" is misquoted.
The actual line is "No, I am your father".
The Mandela Effect is when many people misremember the same thing.
Examples: "Luke, I am your father", Berenstain Bears (not Berenstein), etc.
The Monopoly Man never had a monocle.
Curious George never had a tail.
Pikachu's tail doesn't have a black tip.
C-3PO has a silver leg.
The Fruit of the Loom logo never had a cornucopia.
Darth Vader never said "Luke, I am your father".
The Queen in Snow White never said "Mirror, mirror on the wall".
The actual line is "Magic mirror on the wall".
Hannibal Lecter never said "Hello, Clarice" in Silence of the Lambs.
Hannibal Lecter never said "Hello, Clarice" in Silence of the Lambs — his actual line was "Good morning."
Forrest Gump said "Life was like a box of chocolates", not "is".
Humphrey Bogart never said "Play it again, Sam" in Casablanca.
The actual line is "Play it, Sam".
"Beam me up, Scotty" was never said in Star Trek.
Sherlock Holmes never said "Elementary, my dear Watson" in the original stories.
Frankenstein is the doctor, not the monster.
The monster in Frankenstein has no name.
Frankenstein's monster is often called "Frankenstein's monster".
Dracula is based on Vlad the Impaler.
Vlad the Impaler was a real Romanian prince.
The real Dracula's castle is in Romania.
Vampires are repelled by garlic in folklore.
Vampires can't see their reflection in folklore.
Werewolves transform during a full moon in modern folklore.
Silver bullets kill werewolves in folklore.
Zombies eat brains in modern pop culture.
The zombie brain-eating trope started with "Return of the Living Dead" (1985).
George Romero's "Night of the Living Dead" (1968) popularized zombies.
The Walking Dead is based on a comic book.
The word "zombie" comes from Haitian folklore.
Voodoo zombies are different from modern zombies.
The Salem witch trials killed 20 people.
No one was actually burned at the stake in Salem.
The accused in the 1692 Salem witch trials were hanged or pressed to death — none were actually burned at the stake.
The Salem witch trials happened in 1692.
The last person executed for witchcraft in Europe was in 1782.
Witch hunts killed tens of thousands in Europe.
Most people executed for witchcraft were women.
The Malleus Maleficarum was a guide for witch hunters.
Black cats were associated with witches.
Black cats are considered unlucky in Western culture.
Black cats are considered lucky in Japanese culture.
Friday the 13th is considered unlucky in Western culture.
The fear of Friday the 13th is called paraskevidekatriaphobia.
The number 13 is considered unlucky in Western culture.
Many buildings skip the 13th floor.
The number 4 is considered unlucky in East Asian cultures.
The number 8 is considered lucky in Chinese culture.
The number 7 is considered lucky in Western culture.
Breaking a mirror is said to bring 7 years of bad luck.
Knocking on wood is supposed to prevent bad luck.
Throwing salt over your shoulder reverses bad luck.
Opening an umbrella indoors is considered bad luck.
Walking under a ladder is considered bad luck.
A rabbit's foot is considered a good luck charm.
Four-leaf clovers are considered lucky.
The odds of finding a four-leaf clover are about 1 in 10,000.
Horseshoes are considered lucky.
Wishbones are used for making wishes.
Blowing out birthday candles and making a wish is a tradition.
The birthday song is copyrighted (until 2016).
The birthday song is now in the public domain.
The birthday song is one of the most recognized songs in English.
"Happy Birthday" was originally "Good Morning to All".
The Pledge of Allegiance was written in 1892.
"Under God" was added to the Pledge in 1954.
The national anthem of the USA is "The Star-Spangled Banner".
The Star-Spangled Banner became the official US national anthem in 1931, over 100 years after being written.
The song was written in 1814.
The Star-Spangled Banner was written by Francis Scott Key in 1814 during the War of 1812.
The melody comes from a British drinking song.
Francis Scott Key wrote the lyrics.
The Star-Spangled Banner is difficult to sing.
Many singers have forgotten the words or messed up.
Whitney Houston's 1991 Super Bowl performance is considered the best.
"America the Beautiful" was considered for the national anthem.
Mount Rushmore features Washington, Jefferson, Roosevelt, and Lincoln.
Mount Rushmore was never completed.
There's a hidden room behind Mount Rushmore.
The room contains important U.S. documents.
The room is called the Hall of Records.
The Hall of Records hidden behind Mount Rushmore contains copies of important US documents but is sealed and not open to the public.
The Statue of Liberty was a gift from France.
The Statue of Liberty is made of copper.
The Statue of Liberty was originally brown/copper colored.
The Statue of Liberty was originally copper-brown but turned its iconic green color due to oxidation over decades.
The Statue of Liberty's torch was replaced in 1986.
The original torch is in the museum.
The Statue of Liberty represents freedom.
The Statue of Liberty's official name is "Liberty Enlightening the World."
The Statue of Liberty holds a tablet inscribed with the date July 4, 1776 — American Independence Day.
There are broken chains at her feet.
The crown has 7 spikes representing the 7 continents.
You can climb up to the crown.
The Statue of Liberty is on Liberty Island in New York Harbor.
Ellis Island is nearby.
Ellis Island was the main immigration processing center.
Over 12 million immigrants passed through Ellis Island.
40% of Americans can trace ancestry to Ellis Island.
Angel Island was the West Coast equivalent.
Angel Island processed mostly Asian immigrants.
The Statue of Liberty appears in many movies.
The Statue of Liberty is destroyed in many disaster movies.
The Statue of Liberty is 305 feet tall (with pedestal).
The Eiffel Tower is 1,083 feet tall.
The Eiffel Tower was built for the 1889 World's Fair.
The Eiffel Tower was supposed to be temporary.
The Eiffel Tower was supposed to be demolished after the 1889 World's Fair and was almost torn down before radio antennas gave it a practical use.
Radio antennas saved the Eiffel Tower.
The Eiffel Tower is the most-visited paid monument in the world.
The Eiffel Tower has restaurants on multiple levels.
The Eiffel Tower is painted every 7 years.
Repainting the Eiffel Tower, done every 7 years, requires 60 tons of paint.
The Eiffel Tower's color is called "Eiffel Tower Brown".
The Eiffel Tower has 20,000 light bulbs.
The Eiffel Tower sparkles for 5 minutes every hour at night.
Photographing the Eiffel Tower's nighttime light display is technically illegal under French copyright law because the lighting design is copyrighted.
The law is rarely enforced.
The Eiffel Tower was the tallest structure for 41 years.
The Chrysler Building took the title in 1930.
The Chrysler Building held the title for 11 months.
The Empire State Building took the title in 1931.
The Empire State Building was the tallest for 40 years.
The Empire State Building has 102 floors.
The Empire State Building has its own zip code.
The Empire State Building was built during the Great Depression.
The Empire State Building was constructed in just 410 days — an astonishing feat of engineering during the Great Depression.
Five workers died during construction.
The Empire State Building has been struck by lightning many times.
The Empire State Building acts as a lightning rod for New York City and is struck by lightning about 23 times per year.
The Empire State Building's lights change colors for events.
The Empire State Building has appeared in over 250 movies.
King Kong climbed the Empire State Building in the 1933 film.
The Empire State Building has an observation deck on the 86th floor.
There's also an observation deck on the 102nd floor.
On a clear day, you can see 5 states from the top.
A plane crashed into the Empire State Building in 1945.
The building survived with minimal damage.
The Pentagon is the world's largest office building.
The Pentagon has 17.5 miles of corridors.
The Pentagon was designed so you could walk between any two points in 7 minutes.
The Pentagon has twice as many bathrooms as necessary due to segregation laws.
The Pentagon was built in 16 months during WWII.
The Pentagon has its own police force, fire department, and subway station.
The White House has 132 rooms.
The White House has 35 bathrooms.
The White House has 6 levels.
The White House has 412 doors.
The White House has 147 windows.
The White House has 28 fireplaces.
The White House has 8 staircases.
The White House has 3 elevators.
The White House was burned down by the British in 1814.
After British forces burned the White House in 1814, it was rebuilt and painted white — which may be how it got its name.
Before that, it was gray.
The White House wasn't officially called the White House until 1901.
The White House was not officially called the White House until 1901; before that it was known as the President's House or the Executive Mansion.
Theodore Roosevelt officially named it the White House.
The White House has a bowling alley.
The White House has a movie theater.
The White House has a tennis court.
The White House has a swimming pool (now covered).
The White House has a chocolate shop.
The White House has a florist shop.
The White House has a carpenter's shop.
The Oval Office is in the West Wing.
The Oval Office has 4 doors.
The Resolute Desk in the Oval Office was a gift from Queen Victoria.
The Resolute Desk in the Oval Office was carved from timbers of the British Arctic exploration ship HMS Resolute and gifted to the US by Queen Victoria.
Many presidents have used the Resolute Desk.
JFK Jr. was photographed peeking out from under the desk.
The president's salary is $400,000 per year.
George Washington didn't want to be paid.
George Washington initially refused a presidential salary but reluctantly accepted $25,000 per year at Congress's insistence.
Presidential portraits are painted, not photographed.
The portrait is unveiled after the president leaves office.
Presidential libraries preserve presidential papers.
There are 13 presidential libraries.
The first presidential library was FDR's.
Every president since Hoover has a library.
Presidential libraries are operated by the National Archives.
Presidents can be impeached but not removed by impeachment alone.
Impeachment is like an indictment.
The Senate holds the trial.
Two-thirds of the Senate must vote to convict.
Three presidents have been impeached: Andrew Johnson, Bill Clinton, and Donald Trump.
Donald Trump was impeached twice.
No president has been removed by impeachment.
Richard Nixon resigned before he could be impeached.
Watergate was the scandal that led to Nixon's resignation.
The "-gate" suffix now means scandal.
The Supreme Court has 9 justices.
Supreme Court justices serve for life.
The Chief Justice presides over presidential impeachment trials.
The Supreme Court meets in Washington D.C.
The Supreme Court building was completed in 1935.
Before that, the Court met in the Capitol.
The phrase "Equal Justice Under Law" is above the entrance.
The Supreme Court has the final say on constitutional matters.
Supreme Court decisions can only be overturned by constitutional amendment or future Court decisions.
Brown v. Board of Education ended school segregation.
Roe v. Wade legalized abortion (overturned in 2022).
Miranda v. Arizona established Miranda rights.
You have the right to remain silent.
Anything you say can be used against you.
You have the right to an attorney.
The 5th Amendment protects against self-incrimination.
The 6th Amendment guarantees right to an attorney.
The 1st Amendment protects freedom of speech, religion, press, assembly, and petition.
The 2nd Amendment protects the right to bear arms.
The 4th Amendment protects against unreasonable searches.
The 8th Amendment prohibits cruel and unusual punishment.
The 13th Amendment abolished slavery.
The 19th Amendment gave women the right to vote.
The 26th Amendment lowered the voting age to 18.
The Constitution has 27 amendments.
The Bill of Rights is the first 10 amendments.
The Constitution was ratified in 1788.
The Articles of Confederation came before the Constitution.
The Articles of Confederation were too weak.
The Constitutional Convention was held in Philadelphia in 1787.
The Constitution starts with "We the People".
The Constitution is on display in the National Archives.
The Constitution is written on parchment.
The Declaration of Independence is also on display.
The Declaration of Independence was signed on July 4, 1776.
Not all signers signed on July 4th.
Some signed months later.
Thomas Jefferson wrote the Declaration of Independence.
Thomas Jefferson was only 33 years old when he drafted the Declaration of Independence in 1776.
Benjamin Franklin, John Adams, and others edited it.
The famous phrase is "Life, Liberty, and the pursuit of Happiness".
The Declaration lists grievances against King George III.
56 men signed the Declaration.
John Hancock's signature is the largest.
"John Hancock" now means signature.
Benjamin Franklin was the oldest signer at 70.
Edward Rutledge was the youngest at 26.
The Liberty Bell rang to announce the Declaration (legend).
The Liberty Bell has a famous crack.
The Liberty Bell is in Philadelphia.
The Liberty Bell weighs 2,080 pounds.
The Liberty Bell was cast in London.
The Liberty Bell cracked the very first time it was rung after arriving in Philadelphia.
The Liberty Bell was recast twice after cracking before the permanent crack appeared in the 1840s.
The final crack appeared in the 1840s.
The Liberty Bell has "Proclaim LIBERTY throughout all the land" inscribed.
Independence Hall is where the Constitution and Declaration were signed.
Independence Hall is in Philadelphia.
The Constitutional Convention was held there.
The building is now a museum.
Philadelphia was the capital of the U.S. before Washington D.C.
New York City was also a capital.
Washington D.C. became the capital in 1800.
D.C. stands for District of Columbia.
Washington D.C. is not a state.
D.C. residents pay federal taxes but have no voting representation in Congress.
D.C. has been trying to become a state.
The Washington Monument is an obelisk.
The Washington Monument, standing 555 feet tall, is the world's tallest stone structure.
The Washington Monument in Washington D.C. is 555 feet tall and the world's tallest stone structure.
You can see the color change about 1/3 of the way up.
Construction was halted for 25 years during the Civil War.
After a 25-year construction pause during the Civil War, builders resumed the Washington Monument using marble from a different quarry, causing the visible color change one-third up the obelisk.
The top is aluminum, which was rare at the time.
The Washington Monument has 897 steps.
There's an elevator too.
The Lincoln Memorial has 36 columns.
One for each state at the time of Lincoln's death.
The statue of Lincoln is 19 feet tall.
Lincoln is seated.
The Gettysburg Address is carved on the wall.
The Gettysburg Address is one of the most famous speeches.
The Gettysburg Address — one of the most famous speeches ever delivered — is only 272 words long.
Lincoln spoke for about 2 minutes.
The main speaker before Lincoln spoke for 2 hours.
Lincoln's speech is remembered; the other is forgotten.
"Four score and seven years ago" means 87 years.
The speech starts with "Four score and seven years ago".
The Gettysburg Address ends with Lincoln's famous phrase about government of the people, by the people, for the people.
The Jefferson Memorial is modeled after the Pantheon in Rome.
Thomas Jefferson loved classical architecture.
Thomas Jefferson, who had a deep love of classical architecture, personally designed his Virginia estate Monticello.
Monticello is on the nickel.
Jefferson is on the $2 bill.
The $2 bill is rare but still printed.
Many people think $2 bills are fake.
$2 bills are legal tender.
The largest bill in circulation is the $100 bill.
Larger bills ($500, $1,000, etc.) were discontinued in 1969.
A $100,000 bill existed but was only for government use.
Benjamin Franklin is on the $100 bill.
Benjamin Franklin, despite appearing on the $100 bill, was never president of the United States.
Alexander Hamilton is on the $10 bill.
Alexander Hamilton, who appears on the $10 bill, was never president — he was the first Secretary of the Treasury.
Hamilton was the first Secretary of the Treasury.
Alexander Hamilton was fatally shot in a duel by sitting Vice President Aaron Burr in 1804.
The musical "Hamilton" made him famous again.
The penny costs more than 1 cent to make.
The nickel costs more than 5 cents to make.
Pennies are mostly zinc with copper coating.
Pennies used to be pure copper.
In 1943, pennies were made of steel due to copper shortage.
US pennies minted in 1943 were made of steel instead of copper due to wartime shortages and are called steel pennies.
1943 steel pennies are rare and sought after by coin collectors, sometimes selling for hundreds of dollars.
The nickel is the only coin still called by its metal content.
Dimes, quarters, and half dollars used to be silver.
Now they're copper-nickel.
The change happened in 1965.
Kennedy is on the half dollar.
Washington is on the quarter.
Roosevelt is on the dime.
Jefferson is on the nickel.
Lincoln is on the penny.
State quarters feature each state.
The program started in 1999.
Now there are quarters for territories and national parks too.
Coins have ridges to prevent shaving.
People used to shave off edges of gold and silver coins.
The ridges are called reeding.
Pennies and nickels don't have ridges because they're not precious metals.
"In God We Trust" appeared on coins during the Civil War.
'In God We Trust' first appeared on coins during the Civil War but only became mandatory on all US coins in 1955.
"E Pluribus Unum" means "Out of many, one".
"E Pluribus Unum" meaning "Out of many, one" was the unofficial US motto until it was replaced by "In God We Trust" in 1956.
The dollar sign $ might come from the Spanish peso.
Another theory: it's a U and S combined.
The origin is debated.
Paper money is actually made of cotton and linen, not paper.
That's why it doesn't fall apart in the wash.
A dollar bill lasts about 18 months in circulation.
A $100 bill lasts about 15 years.
Larger bills last longer because they're used less.
Old bills are shredded and recycled.
You can exchange torn bills at banks if you have more than half.
The Bureau of Engraving and Printing makes U.S. currency.
The Bureau of Engraving and Printing produces billions of dollars in banknotes annually, mostly to replace worn-out bills already in circulation.
Most is to replace worn-out bills.
Counterfeiting is illegal and taken very seriously.
Modern bills have many security features.
Watermarks, security threads, color-shifting ink, etc.
The Secret Service was originally created to fight counterfeiting.
Now they're known for protecting the president.
Although the US Secret Service is famous for protecting the president, it was originally founded to fight counterfeiting and still investigates financial crimes.
The FBI investigates federal crimes.
The CIA gathers foreign intelligence.
The NSA focuses on signals intelligence.
NASA explores space.
NASA stands for National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
NASA was created in 1958.
The Space Race was between the USA and USSR.
The USSR launched Sputnik, the first satellite, in 1957.
Yuri Gagarin was the first human in space in 1961.
Yuri Gagarin, the first human to travel to space in April 1961, was a Soviet cosmonaut from the USSR.
Alan Shepard was the first American in space, weeks later.
John Glenn was the first American to orbit Earth in 1962.
Neil Armstrong was the first person on the moon in 1969.
"That's one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind".
Neil Armstrong's famous quote may have been 'one small step for a man' — but the article 'a' is inaudible in all recordings.
Buzz Aldrin was the second person on the moon.
Michael Collins orbited while they walked on the moon.
12 people have walked on the moon.
All were American men.
The last moon landing was Apollo 17 in 1972.
No one has been back since.
There are plans to return.
Some people believe the moon landing was faked.
The 1969 moon landing was not faked — retroreflectors left on the lunar surface and independently verified by scientists worldwide confirm it was real.
The flags on the moon are probably white now from radiation.
The flags appear to wave because of the movement from planting them.
There's no wind on the moon.
You can see the American flag in photos from lunar orbit.
Actually, the flags are too small to see from lunar orbit.
But retroreflectors left on the moon prove we were there.
Lasers bounced off these mirrors measure the moon's distance.
The moon is drifting away at 1.5 inches per year.
We know this because of the retroreflectors.
The International Space Station orbits Earth.
Astronauts live there for months at a time.
The ISS travels at 17,500 mph.
The International Space Station travels at 17,500 mph and completes a full orbit of Earth every 90 minutes.
Astronauts see 16 sunrises and sunsets per day.
The ISS is the size of a football field.
The International Space Station has been continuously inhabited by rotating crews of astronauts since November 2000.
Astronauts from many countries have visited.
The ISS is a collaboration of NASA, Roscosmos, ESA, JAXA, and CSA.
Astronauts exercise 2 hours a day to prevent muscle loss.
Because of microgravity on the ISS, astronauts sleep in sleeping bags anchored to the walls.
Food is often freeze-dried or in pouches.
Astronauts aboard the International Space Station recycle urine through advanced filtration systems to produce clean drinking water.
Although recycling urine sounds unpleasant, the drinking water produced on the ISS is cleaner than most tap water on Earth.
Water is precious in space.
Astronauts can see the Great Barrier Reef from space.
Astronauts on the ISS can clearly see illuminated cities glowing on Earth's surface at night.
Despite the popular myth, astronauts on the ISS cannot see the Great Wall of China with the naked eye — it is too narrow.
The claim that the Great Wall of China is visible from space with the naked eye is a widely repeated myth with no basis in fact.
China's cities are visible, but not the wall.
Spacewalks are called EVAs (Extra-Vehicular Activity).
Spacewalks can last 6-8 hours.
The first spacewalk was by Alexei Leonov in 1965.
During the first spacewalk in 1965, Soviet cosmonaut Alexei Leonov's suit inflated so much in the vacuum of space that he almost couldn't squeeze back into the airlock.
Spacesuits are basically personal spacecraft.
Spacesuits are essentially wearable spacecraft, providing astronauts with oxygen, pressurization, temperature control, and protection from radiation.
Spacesuits cost millions of dollars.
The white color reflects heat.
Astronauts wear diapers during spacewalks and launches.
The diapers worn by astronauts during spacewalks and rocket launches are officially called MAGs — Maximum Absorbency Garments.
Space smells like seared steak, metal, and welding fumes.
Space smells like seared steak, hot metal, and welding fumes — a scent caused by high-energy particles released by dying stars.
Astronauts can grow taller in space.
Without gravity, the spine elongates.
Astronauts grow up to 3% taller in space as their spines elongate in microgravity, then return to their normal height after coming back to Earth.
Bones and muscles weaken in space without gravity.
That's why exercise is crucial.
The longest time in space is 437 days by Valeri Polyakov.
Scott Kelly spent a year in space.
NASA astronaut Scott Kelly spent a year on the ISS while his identical twin brother Mark stayed on Earth, serving as a genetic control for health studies.
Space affected Scott's DNA expression.
Most changes reversed when he returned.
Mars is the focus of future exploration.
A trip to Mars takes about 7 months.
Elon Musk wants to colonize Mars.
SpaceX is his company.
SpaceX has reusable rockets.
The Falcon 9 can land after launching.
The SpaceX Falcon 9's ability to land itself after delivering cargo to orbit was considered a revolutionary breakthrough in rocket technology.
Reusable rockets dramatically reduce the cost of reaching orbit by eliminating the need to build a new rocket for every launch.
SpaceX launches satellites and supplies to the ISS.
SpaceX has launched astronauts to the ISS.
Blue Origin is Jeff Bezos' space company.
Virgin Galactic is Richard Branson's space company.
Blue Origin and Virgin Galactic, founded by Jeff Bezos and Richard Branson respectively, are primarily focused on space tourism.
Space tourism is becoming real.
Space tourism flights currently cost hundreds of thousands to tens of millions of dollars per seat.
A seat on Blue Origin or Virgin Galactic costs hundreds of thousands.
A trip to the ISS costs tens of millions.
Dennis Tito was the first space tourist in 2001.
Dennis Tito, the first private space tourist in 2001, paid approximately $20 million to fly to the International Space Station aboard a Russian Soyuz.
The Hubble Space Telescope has taken amazing pictures.
The Hubble Space Telescope has been orbiting Earth and transforming our view of the universe since its launch in April 1990.
The Hubble Space Telescope was serviced and upgraded five times by NASA astronauts during spacewalks between 1993 and 2009.
The James Webb Space Telescope launched in 2021.
The James Webb Space Telescope, launched in December 2021, is far more powerful than the Hubble telescope it was designed to succeed.
The James Webb Space Telescope can observe light from galaxies formed just 100 million years after the Big Bang.
Looking at distant objects means looking back in time because light takes time to travel.
The James Webb can see the first galaxies.
The James Webb Space Telescope orbits the Sun at Lagrange Point 2, about one million miles from Earth.
The James Webb Space Telescope is protected by a five-layer sunshield the size of a tennis court to keep its instruments cold enough to detect infrared light.
The sunshield protects it from the sun's heat.
The telescope must be very cold to detect infrared.
Infrared lets us see through dust clouds.
Many stars are born in dust clouds.
The James Webb has already made discoveries.
The James Webb Space Telescope has observed some of the oldest and most distant galaxies ever detected.
The James Webb Space Telescope has detected water vapor and other molecules in the atmospheres of distant exoplanets.
Exoplanets are planets outside our solar system.
Thousands of exoplanets have been discovered.
Some might have life.
The "habitable zone" is where liquid water could exist.
Water is essential for life as we know it.
SETI searches for signs of alien intelligence.
SETI — the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence — scans the sky for artificial radio signals that might indicate an alien civilization.
No confirmed signals have been found.
The Drake Equation estimates the number of civilizations.
The Fermi Paradox asks "Where is everybody?".
If aliens exist, why haven't we found them?
Possible answers: they're too far, we're alone, they're hiding, we're not looking right, etc.
UFO sightings are often explained by natural phenomena or human aircraft.
The government has released some UFO footage.
Most have mundane explanations.
Some remain unexplained.
Unexplained doesn't mean aliens.
Area 51 is a real military base.
Area 51 is a classified US Air Force facility in Nevada that has been used to test secret aircraft including the U-2 spy plane and stealth bombers.
The U-2 spy plane was tested there.
Stealth aircraft were developed there.
The secrecy led to alien conspiracy theories.
Roswell, New Mexico is famous for a supposed UFO crash.
The 1947 Roswell 'UFO crash' was actually a downed balloon from the top-secret Project Mogul, a military surveillance program.
The government's secrecy fueled conspiracy theories.
Ancient astronaut theories claim aliens visited Earth.
There's no credible evidence for this.
Ancient humans were smart and capable of building monuments.
The pyramids were built by humans, not aliens.
We have evidence of how they were built.
Ramps, levers, and thousands of workers.
It took decades to build the Great Pyramid.
The Great Pyramid was the tallest man-made structure for 3,800 years.
It's one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World.
It's the only one still standing.
The others were destroyed by earthquakes, fires, or conquest.
The Hanging Gardens of Babylon may not have existed.
The Colossus of Rhodes was a giant statue.
It stood for only 54 years before an earthquake destroyed it.
The Lighthouse of Alexandria was one of the tallest structures of its time.
It guided ships for centuries.
The ancient Mausoleum at Halicarnassus was gradually destroyed by earthquakes during the medieval period.
The Statue of Zeus at Olympia was a giant statue.
The ancient Statue of Zeus at Olympia, one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, was moved to Constantinople and eventually destroyed or lost.
The Temple of Artemis was burned down multiple times.
The Mausoleum at Halicarnassus was a tomb.
The word 'mausoleum' derives from the ancient Mausoleum at Halicarnassus — the grand tomb of King Mausolus of Caria.
The ancient Mausoleum at Halicarnassus was gradually destroyed by earthquakes during the medieval period.
The New Seven Wonders of the World were chosen in 2007.
The New Seven Wonders of the World, voted on in 2007, are the Great Wall of China, Petra, Christ the Redeemer, Machu Picchu, Chichen Itza, the Colosseum, and the Taj Mahal.
The Great Wall of China is over 13,000 miles long.
The Great Wall of China was not built in one effort — it was constructed and extended over many centuries by different Chinese rulers.
Petra is a city carved into rock in Jordan.
The ancient Nabataean city of Petra in Jordan is most famous for Al-Khazneh — the Treasury — a grand facade carved directly into sandstone cliffs.
Petra appeared in Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade.
Christ the Redeemer is a statue in Rio de Janeiro.
The Christ the Redeemer statue overlooking Rio de Janeiro stands 98 feet tall on top of Corcovado mountain.
The Christ the Redeemer statue in Rio de Janeiro was completed in 1931 after five years of construction.
Machu Picchu is an Incan city in Peru.
Machu Picchu was constructed in the 15th century at the height of the Inca Empire.
Machu Picchu was abandoned by the Inca around 1572 and remained unknown to the outside world until 1911.
Machu Picchu was introduced to the outside world in 1911 by American historian Hiram Bingham, who was led there by a local boy.
Chichen Itza is a Mayan city in Mexico.
The pyramid of Kukulkan is famous.
During equinoxes, shadows create a snake shape on the steps.
The Colosseum in Rome could hold 50,000 spectators.
Gladiators fought there.
The Roman Colosseum has been damaged by earthquakes over the centuries and its south side collapsed during a major quake in 1349.
Despite centuries of damage and stone removal, the Colosseum in Rome still stands and draws over six million visitors per year.
The Taj Mahal is a mausoleum in India.
The Taj Mahal was commissioned by Mughal Emperor Shah Jahan as a mausoleum for his beloved wife Mumtaz Mahal, who died in 1631.
The Taj Mahal took 22 years to complete, with over 20,000 workers employed during construction.
The Taj Mahal is built entirely of white marble inlaid with precious and semi-precious stones from across Asia.
The Taj Mahal is consistently ranked as one of the most beautiful and architecturally perfect buildings ever created.
The Taj Mahal changes color throughout the day.
Pollution has been damaging the marble.
Efforts are being made to preserve it.
The Angkor Wat temple complex in Cambodia is the largest religious monument.
Angkor Wat in Cambodia was built in the early 12th century under King Suryavarman II and remains the world's largest religious monument.
Angkor Wat was originally dedicated to the Hindu god Vishnu but was converted to a Buddhist temple in the 14th century.
The Sagrada Familia in Barcelona has been under construction since 1882.
The Sagrada Família in Barcelona, begun in 1882, is projected to be completed around 2026 — over 140 years after construction started.
Antoni Gaudí designed it.
Architect Antoni Gaudí devoted over 40 years of his life to designing the Sagrada Família and is buried in its crypt.
Antoni Gaudí was struck by a tram in Barcelona in 1926 and died without ever seeing the Sagrada Família completed.
The Burj Khalifa in Dubai is the tallest building.
The Burj Khalifa in Dubai stands 2,722 feet tall — the tallest human-made structure ever built.
The Burj Khalifa has 163 floors and took six years to construct, opening in January 2010.
Construction took 6 years.
You can watch the sunset from the top, descend, and watch it again.
The building is so tall it has different climates at different levels.
The Burj Al Arab is a luxury hotel in Dubai.
The Burj Al Arab luxury hotel in Dubai is designed to resemble a billowing sail and rises from its own artificial island.
The Burj Al Arab in Dubai is often described as the world's most luxurious hotel, with suites starting at thousands of dollars per night.
Rooms start at over $1,000 per night.
Dubai has many record-breaking structures.
The Palm Jumeirah is an artificial island shaped like a palm tree.
The Palm Jumeirah, Dubai's palm-shaped artificial island, is large enough to be seen from space.
Dubai was built in the desert.
Dubai grew from a small fishing village in the 1970s into one of the world's fastest-growing and most modern cities.
Las Vegas was also built in the desert.
Las Vegas is famous for casinos and entertainment.
"What happens in Vegas stays in Vegas" is the slogan.
The Las Vegas Strip is about 4 miles long.
Contrary to popular belief, the famous Las Vegas Strip lies outside Las Vegas city limits in the unincorporated communities of Paradise and Winchester.
The Las Vegas Strip is technically located in Paradise and Winchester, Nevada — not the city of Las Vegas itself.
The Luxor hotel is shaped like a pyramid.
The Venetian has canals with gondolas inside.
The Bellagio has famous fountain shows.
Cirque du Soleil has multiple shows in Las Vegas.
Vegas has replicas of the Eiffel Tower, Statue of Liberty, and more.
Marriage chapels are everywhere in Vegas.
You can get married quickly in Vegas.
Many celebrity weddings happened there.
Some were annulled quickly.
Britney Spears had a 55-hour marriage in Vegas.
Nicolas Cage and Erika Koike's marriage lasted 4 days.
Las Vegas means "The Meadows" in Spanish.
Before casinos, it was a railroad town.
The Hoover Dam is nearby.
The Hoover Dam was built between 1931 and 1936 during the Great Depression, providing employment for thousands of desperate workers.
The Hoover Dam's hydroelectric generators supply electricity to Nevada, Arizona, and California — including Las Vegas.
When the Hoover Dam was completed, the Colorado River backed up to form Lake Mead, the largest reservoir in the United States.
Lake Mead is shrinking due to drought.
Climate change is affecting water levels.
The Colorado River feeds Lake Mead.
The Colorado River carved the Grand Canyon.
The Grand Canyon is 277 miles long.
The Grand Canyon stretches up to 18 miles wide at its broadest point and was carved by the Colorado River over millions of years.
The Grand Canyon plunges over a mile deep, exposing rock layers that represent nearly two billion years of Earth's geological history.
The Colorado River is at the bottom.
Rafting the Colorado River through the Grand Canyon takes weeks.
The Grand Canyon was formed over millions of years.
Rock layers reveal billions of years of Earth's history.
The oldest rocks are nearly 2 billion years old.
The Grand Canyon is one of the Seven Natural Wonders.
The Aurora Borealis (Northern Lights) is another.
Aurora Australis is the Southern Lights.
The Northern Lights (Aurora Borealis) and Southern Lights (Aurora Australis) are caused by charged particles from the Sun colliding with gases in Earth's atmosphere.
When solar particles interact with Earth's atmosphere, they produce the shimmering green, pink, and purple light displays known as the auroras.
Green is the most common color.
The aurora borealis is best seen from countries near the Arctic Circle, such as Norway, Iceland, Finland, and Alaska.
Iceland, Norway, and Alaska are popular viewing spots.
Mount Everest is another Natural Wonder.
Victoria Falls is on the border of Zambia and Zimbabwe.
Victoria Falls, on the border of Zambia and Zimbabwe, is the world's largest waterfall by combined width and height.
The Great Barrier Reef is the largest coral reef system.
The Great Barrier Reef stretches for over 1,400 miles off the northeastern coast of Queensland, Australia.
The Great Barrier Reef is so vast it is visible from space, making it the only living structure visible from orbit.
Climate change is bleaching the coral.
Coral bleaching happens when water is too warm.
The coral expels algae and turns white.
Bleached coral is stressed but not dead — if ocean temperatures drop in time, the coral can reabsorb its algae and recover.
But repeated bleaching kills coral.
The reef supports thousands of species.
Losing it would be an ecological disaster.
Parícutin is a volcano in Mexico.
Parícutin volcano in Michoacán, Mexico is recognized as one of the Seven Natural Wonders of the World.
The Parícutin volcano first erupted from a flat cornfield in Mexico in 1943, shocking local farmers by appearing out of nowhere.
Parícutin volcano rose to over 1,000 feet within its first year of existence — one of the fastest-growing volcanoes ever recorded.
The lava and ash from the Parícutin volcano engulfed two Mexican towns — Paricutín and San Juan Parangaricutiro — during its nine years of activity.
Parícutin volcano erupted continuously from 1943 to 1952 and has been dormant ever since.
Scientists witnessed its entire life cycle.
Scientists were able to observe the entire lifespan of Parícutin from its birth to dormancy — an event considered extremely rare in geology.
The Harbor of Rio de Janeiro is a Natural Wonder.
Guanabara Bay is surrounded by mountains.
Christ the Redeemer overlooks it.
Rio de Janeiro means "River of January".
Portuguese explorers thought the bay was a river.
Portuguese explorers who discovered Guanabara Bay in Brazil in 1502 arrived in January and mistook the bay for a river, naming it 'River of January' — Rio de Janeiro.
Brazil was colonized by Portugal.
Brazil speaks Portuguese, not Spanish.
Brazil is the largest nation in South America and the only country on the continent where Portuguese is the official language.
Brazil is the largest country in South America.
The Amazon rainforest covers much of it.
The Amazon River is the second-longest river.
The Nile is the longest.
The Amazon has the highest volume of water.
The Amazon has more tributaries than the Nile.
The Amazon basin is the size of the continental US.
20% of Earth's oxygen comes from the Amazon.
The Amazon rainforest generates about 20% of the world's oxygen and is frequently called 'the lungs of the Earth.'
Deforestation is a major threat.
The rainforest is being cleared for agriculture.
Burning and clearing Amazon rainforest releases enormous amounts of stored carbon dioxide, accelerating global climate change.
Amazon deforestation eliminates irreplaceable habitat for an estimated 10% of all species on Earth.
Many species haven't even been discovered.
Indigenous people have lived in the Amazon for thousands of years.
Some tribes have no contact with the outside world.
Protecting the Amazon is crucial for the planet.
The Amazon River has pink dolphins.
The pink dolphins of the Amazon River are among the very few dolphin species adapted to freshwater river environments.
Amazon river dolphins look pink because blood vessels near their skin surface show through; younger dolphins are actually gray.
Piranhas live in the Amazon.
Piranhas have a fearsome reputation from movies, but in reality they rarely attack humans and mostly feed on fish and insects.
Piranha attacks on humans in the Amazon are extremely uncommon; the fish are far more likely to scavenge than hunt large animals.
The electric eel is not an eel; it's a type of knifefish.
The electric eel — technically a knifefish, not an eel — can generate electric shocks of up to 600 volts to stun prey and deter predators.
Anacondas are the largest snakes by weight.
Reticulated pythons are the longest snakes.
The largest anaconda ever found was 28 feet long.
The longest reticulated python was over 32 feet.
Most anaconda and python stories are exaggerated.
Snakes rarely eat humans.
We're too big for most snakes.
Large constrictors like anacondas and pythons could, but it's extremely rare.
Poison dart frogs live in rainforests.
Indigenous people used their toxin on darts.
The golden poison dart frog is the most toxic.
One frog has enough toxin to kill 10 humans.
Poison dart frogs obtain their toxicity from the insects they eat in the wild; frogs raised in captivity on a different diet are harmless.
In captivity with a different diet, they're not toxic.
Sloths move so slowly that algae grows on their fur.
Sloths move so slowly that algae colonizes their fur, giving them a greenish tint that serves as natural camouflage in the forest canopy.
Moths live in their fur.
Sloths are excellent swimmers.
Sloths are strong swimmers and can slow their heart rate to hold their breath underwater for up to 40 minutes.
Sloths only poop once a week.
Sloths descend to the forest floor once a week to defecate — a dangerous journey that exposes them to ground predators.
Sloths' rare trips to the ground to defecate are extremely risky, as they are highly vulnerable to predators while on the forest floor.
Scientists aren't sure why they don't just poop from the trees.
Toucans have huge beaks relative to their size.
The beak is hollow and lightweight.
The toucan's enormous beak, despite its size, is hollow and lightweight and acts as a thermal radiator to regulate the bird's body temperature.
Toucans are the mascot of Froot Loops cereal.
Macaws are large, colorful parrots.
Macaws form monogamous bonds and mate for life, often becoming visibly distressed if separated from their partner.
Macaws are among the longest-lived birds, with lifespans of over 50 years in the wild and up to 80 years in captivity.
Parrots are very intelligent.
Some can learn hundreds of words.
Alex the African Grey parrot could identify colors, shapes, and numbers.
Alex the African Grey parrot could identify objects by color, shape, and material, and understood abstract concepts like same and different.
Alex the African Grey parrot demonstrated cognitive abilities comparable to a 5-year-old human child, according to his researcher Dr. Irene Pepperberg.
When he died, his last words to his trainer were "You be good. I love you."
Alex the parrot's final words to his trainer the night before he died — 'You be good. I love you. You'll be in tomorrow?' — have moved millions of people worldwide.
Crows are also extremely intelligent.
Crows are among the few non-primate animals observed making and using tools, such as fashioning hooks from wire to retrieve food.
Crows can recognize and remember individual human faces and will react differently to people who have threatened them in the past.
Crows hold long-term grudges against humans who have harmed them and will harass those individuals years later.
Crows teach their young which human faces to distrust, demonstrating cultural transmission of learned information across generations.
A study showed crows remembering and dive-bombing people who had trapped them years earlier.
Crows also taught other crows to recognize the "bad" person.
Ravens are larger than crows.
Ravens can mimic sounds, including human speech.
Ravens appear as symbols of death, war, and the afterlife in Norse, Celtic, and Native American mythologies.
In Norse mythology, Odin had two ravens: Huginn and Muninn.
In Norse mythology, the god Odin kept two ravens — Huginn (Thought) and Muninn (Memory) — who flew the world and reported back to him.
Ravens can plan for the future.
Ravens can plan for the future by saving tools for later use — a cognitive ability long believed to be uniquely human.
Animals are much smarter than we once thought.
Elephants mourn their dead.
Elephants gather around the bodies of deceased herd members in what researchers describe as mourning rituals or funerals.
Elephants revisit the bones of deceased relatives and gently touch and examine them with their trunks, sometimes for hours.
Elephants can recognize themselves in mirrors.
Dolphins can recognize themselves in mirrors.
So can great apes, magpies, and some other animals.
Animals that can recognize themselves in mirrors — including elephants, dolphins, and great apes — are considered to possess a form of self-awareness.
Dogs can't recognize themselves in mirrors.
But they can recognize themselves by smell.
Dogs have a sense of time.
Dogs have a strong sense of routine and time and often position themselves at the door shortly before their owner is expected home.
Dogs can smell your emotions.
Fear, anxiety, and happiness all have chemical signatures.
Dogs' noses are 10,000 to 100,000 times more sensitive than ours.
Dogs can be trained to detect cancer, diabetes, seizures, and more.
Cats have a better sense of smell than humans but not as good as dogs.
Cats can hear ultrasonic sounds that humans and dogs cannot.
Cats can rotate their ears 180 degrees.
Cats have a third eyelid called a nictitating membrane.
A group of cats is called a clowder.
A group of kittens is called a kindle.
A group of fish is called a school.
A group of sharks is called a shiver.
A group of rhinos is called a crash.
A group of hippos is called a bloat.
A group of leopards is called a leap.
A group of tigers is called an ambush.
A group of bears is called a sloth.
A group of foxes is called a skulk.
A group of wolves is called a pack.
A group of hyenas is called a cackle.
A group of crocodiles is called a bask.
A group of frogs is called an army.
A group of turtles is called a bale.
A group of snakes is called a nest.
A group of lizards is called a lounge.
A group of butterflies is called a kaleidoscope.
A group of beetles is called a swarm.
A group of ants is called a colony.
A group of bees is called a swarm or grist.
A group of wasps is called a colony or nest.
A group of grasshoppers is called a cloud.
A group of cockroaches is called an intrusion.
A group of spiders is called a cluster or clutter.
A group of worms is called a clew.
A group of clams is called a bed.
A group of oysters is called a bed or colony.
A group of crabs is called a cast.
A group of shrimp is called a troupe.
A group of dolphins is called a pod.
A group of whales is called a pod or gam.
A group of seals is called a colony or pod.
A group of sea lions is called a colony.
A group of penguins is called a rookery or colony.
A group of puffins is called a colony or circus.
A group of eagles is called a convocation.
A group of hawks is called a kettle.
A group of falcons is called a cast.
A group of herons is called a siege.
A group of storks is called a muster.
A group of peacocks is called a muster.
A group of turkeys is called a rafter.
A group of pheasants is called a bouquet.
A group of parrots is called a pandemonium.
A group of swans is called a bevy or wedge.
A group of ducks is called a raft or paddling.
A group of pigeons is called a flock or kit.
A group of sparrows is called a host.
A group of starlings is called a murmuration.
Starling murmurations can contain millions of birds.
They move as one fluid shape to confuse predators.
No bird leads a murmuration; it's self-organized.
Each bird follows its seven closest neighbors.
This creates beautiful, flowing aerial displays.
The word "salary" comes from the Latin word for salt.
Roman soldiers were sometimes paid in salt.
Salt was once more valuable than gold.
The word "soldier" also has roots related to salt.
The phrase "worth his salt" comes from this history.
Salt was used as currency in ancient Ethiopia.
Salt roads were major trade routes in ancient times.
The city of Salzburg means "Salt Castle" in German.
Salt can be used to preserve food because it draws out moisture.
Salt lowers the freezing point of water, which is why it's used on icy roads.
The human body contains about 250 grams of salt.
Too much salt raises blood pressure.
Too little salt can cause hyponatremia.
The ocean is salty because rivers carry dissolved minerals to it.
The Dead Sea is so salty nothing can live in it except bacteria.
Salt flats form when saltwater lakes evaporate.
The Bonneville Salt Flats in Utah are used for land speed records.
The world's largest salt flat is Salar de Uyuni in Bolivia.
It's so flat and reflective it's used to calibrate satellites.
After rain, it becomes the world's largest mirror.
Bolivia has over half the world's lithium reserves.
Lithium is used in batteries for phones and electric cars.
Electric cars produce zero direct emissions.
But making their batteries does create emissions.
The lifetime emissions of an electric car are still lower than gas cars.
The first electric car was built in 1884.
Electric cars were actually more popular than gas cars in 1900.
The gas engine won out because of cheap oil.
Oil was discovered in Pennsylvania in 1859.
The first oil well was drilled by Edwin Drake.
It was only 69 feet deep.
Today oil wells can be over 30,000 feet deep.
The deepest oil well ever drilled is in Russia at 40,230 feet.
Oil takes millions of years to form from organic matter.
Coal also takes millions of years to form.
Natural gas forms the same way.
These are called fossil fuels.
Fossil fuels release carbon that was stored underground.
This is why they contribute to climate change.
The greenhouse effect keeps Earth warm.
Without it, Earth would be frozen.
Too much greenhouse effect causes global warming.
Carbon dioxide is the main greenhouse gas from humans.
Methane is a more potent but shorter-lived greenhouse gas.
Water vapor is actually the most abundant greenhouse gas.
The ozone layer protects us from UV radiation.
CFCs (from old refrigerants) damaged the ozone layer.
The Montreal Protocol banned CFCs.
The ozone layer is slowly recovering.
This is one of humanity's great environmental success stories.
Acid rain is caused by sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides.
It damages forests and aquatic ecosystems.
Clean air regulations have reduced acid rain significantly.
The Thames River in London was once biologically dead.
Clean water acts helped it recover.
It now has over 100 species of fish.
The Cuyahoga River in Ohio caught fire multiple times.
It helped spark the environmental movement.
The Clean Water Act was passed in 1972.
Bald eagles were nearly extinct from DDT.
DDT was banned and eagles recovered.
There are now thousands of bald eagles again.
The California condor nearly went extinct.
Captive breeding programs saved it.
There are now over 500 condors.
The Arabian oryx went extinct in the wild.
Captive breeding reintroduced it.
It's now off the endangered list.
The black-footed ferret was thought extinct.
A small population was found in Wyoming.
Captive breeding restored the wild population.
The whooping crane was down to 15 birds.
Conservation brought it back to over 800.
The humpback whale population has recovered significantly.
Blue whales are still endangered.
The International Whaling Commission banned commercial whaling.
Japan still hunts whales for "scientific research".
Whales are vital to ocean ecosystems.
When whales die, they become "whale falls" that feed ocean ecosystems for decades.
The ocean absorbs about 30% of CO2 emissions.
This makes the ocean more acidic.
Ocean acidification affects shellfish and coral.
Seagrass meadows store carbon efficiently.
Mangrove forests are among the most productive ecosystems.
Kelp forests can grow over a foot per day.
Sea otters maintain kelp forests by eating urchins.
When sea otters were hunted nearly to extinction, urchins overran kelp forests.
Sea otters were saved by the Marine Mammal Protection Act.
A keystone species has a disproportionate effect on its ecosystem.
Wolves are a keystone species in Yellowstone.
When wolves were reintroduced, they changed rivers.
Deer avoided grazing near rivers, allowing vegetation to grow.
This stabilized riverbanks and changed water flow.
This is called a trophic cascade.
Yellowstone National Park was the world's first national park.
It was established in 1872.
It covers parts of Wyoming, Montana, and Idaho.
It has more geysers than anywhere else on Earth.
Old Faithful erupts about every 90 minutes.
It's not as predictable as its name suggests.
Yellowstone sits on a supervolcano.
A full eruption would be catastrophic.
The last major eruption was 640,000 years ago.
The Yellowstone supervolcano is monitored constantly.
There's a smaller supervolcano under Lake Toba in Indonesia.
It erupted 74,000 years ago.
It may have nearly wiped out humanity.
The human population may have dropped to as few as 10,000.
This is called the Toba catastrophe theory.
Volcanic winters can last years.
The 1815 eruption of Mount Tambora caused "the year without a summer."
Snow fell in New England in June.
Crops failed across the Northern Hemisphere.
The famine killed tens of thousands.
Mary Shelley wrote Frankenstein during this dark summer.
She was stuck indoors with Lord Byron and others.
Byron proposed they each write a ghost story.
Shelley's became one of the most famous novels.
Frankenstein was published in 1818.
It's considered the first science fiction novel.
Jules Verne also pioneered science fiction.
He predicted submarines, space travel, and more.
H.G. Wells predicted the atomic bomb and genetic engineering.
Isaac Asimov coined the term "robotics".
He created the Three Laws of Robotics.
The first programmable robot was made in 1954.
The term "robot" comes from a Czech word meaning "forced labor."
It was first used in a 1920 play.
The first industrial robot was used by General Motors in 1961.
It was called Unimate.
It handled hot die castings.
Today robots perform surgery, explore other planets, and defuse bombs.
The Mars rovers are robots.
Spirit and Opportunity were designed for 90 days.
Opportunity lasted over 14 years.
It traveled over 28 miles on Mars.
Curiosity and Perseverance are still active.
Perseverance collected rock samples for future return to Earth.
Ingenuity helicopter flew on Mars, the first powered aircraft on another planet.
The Wright Brothers' first flight lasted 12 seconds.
It covered 120 feet.
The plane reached 10 feet altitude.
Orville won the coin toss to fly first.
Their success came after years of failed attempts.
They were bicycle mechanics, not trained engineers.
Many people smarter and better funded failed before them.
The Wright brothers never married, focusing on their work.
They invented the three-axis control system still used today.
The first commercial flight was in 1914.
It crossed Tampa Bay in Florida.
It lasted 23 minutes.
There was only one passenger.
He paid $400 for the trip.
Transatlantic flight began in 1919.
Charles Lindbergh made the first solo transatlantic flight in 1927.
He flew from New York to Paris in 33.5 hours.
His plane was called the Spirit of St. Louis.
He stayed awake for the entire flight.
He nearly crashed multiple times due to fatigue.
He landed to a crowd of 150,000 people.
He became the most famous person in the world overnight.
Amelia Earhart was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic.
She disappeared over the Pacific in 1937.
Her fate remains a mystery.
Some believe she landed on an island and survived briefly.
The search for her plane continues.
The jet engine was invented simultaneously by Frank Whittle in England and Hans von Ohain in Germany.
The first jet-powered flight was in 1939.
Modern jets can fly at 575 mph.
The Concorde flew at 1,350 mph.
It crossed the Atlantic in 3.5 hours.
It was retired in 2003 after a fatal crash.
The fastest aircraft is the SR-71 Blackbird.
It could fly at over 2,200 mph.
It flew so fast that it would expand several inches from heat.
It was designed to leak fuel on the ground and seal when hot.
It was used for reconnaissance.
It never carried weapons.
It could outrun missiles.
If locked on by radar, the pilot would just accelerate.
It was retired in 1998.
The Space Shuttle was the first reusable spacecraft.
It launched like a rocket and landed like a plane.
It flew 135 missions.
Two were lost: Challenger in 1986 and Columbia in 2003.
The program ended in 2011.
The shuttle's main engines were the most efficient ever built.
The solid rocket boosters were recovered from the ocean and reused.
The external tank was the only part not recovered.
It broke up in the atmosphere over the ocean.
The shuttle's tiles could withstand temperatures up to 3,000°F.
Each tile was individually fitted.
There were over 24,000 tiles on each shuttle.
The shuttle had no ejection seats for most of its missions.
The crew cabin was theoretically detachable.
But it was never tested and probably wouldn't have worked.
The ISS was assembled piece by piece over 13 years.
The first module was launched in 1998.
The station is as long as a football field.
It weighs about 925,000 pounds.
It has more livable space than a six-bedroom house.
The toilet on the ISS costs $19 million.
It recycles urine into drinking water.
Astronauts on the ISS can see 16 sunrises and sunsets per day.
They experience microgravity, not zero gravity.
There's still gravity in orbit; they're in free fall.
Objects in orbit are constantly falling toward Earth but moving sideways fast enough to keep missing it.
This is what orbit means.
The first satellite, Sputnik, was a metal sphere with four antennas.
It beeped as it orbited.
It shocked the Western world.
Congress passed the National Defense Education Act in response.
This funded math and science education.
Today there are over 9,000 satellites in orbit.
Only about 5,000 are operational.
SpaceX is planning to launch tens of thousands of Starlink satellites.
This could affect astronomy.
Light pollution from satellites interferes with telescopes.
Radio frequency interference is also a concern.
The Hubble Space Telescope has produced over 1.5 million observations.
It has helped determine the age of the universe.
It revealed that the universe's expansion is accelerating.
This led to the discovery of dark energy.
Dark energy makes up about 68% of the universe.
Dark matter makes up about 27%.
Normal matter makes up only about 5%.
We can't see dark matter or dark energy directly.
We infer their existence from their effects.
Galaxies rotate faster than they should based on visible matter.
This suggests invisible mass is holding them together.
This is dark matter.
String theory attempts to unify all forces.
It suggests particles are vibrating strings of energy.
It requires 10 or 11 dimensions.
It's mathematically elegant but unproven.
The Large Hadron Collider searches for new particles.
It's the world's largest machine.
It's 17 miles in circumference.
It accelerates particles to near the speed of light.
The Higgs boson was discovered there in 2012.
The Higgs boson gives other particles mass.
It was called the "God particle" by the media.
Scientists don't actually like that nickname.
Peter Higgs predicted it in 1964.
He was alive to see its discovery.
The Nobel Prize in Physics was awarded for this in 2013.
Antimatter is the opposite of normal matter.
When matter and antimatter meet, they annihilate.
The universe should have equal amounts.
But it doesn't, which is why we exist.
This asymmetry is one of the great mysteries of physics.
A single gram of antimatter would release 43 kilotons of energy.
NASA has used antimatter to power spacecraft.
PET scans use antimatter (positrons).
The brain's positron emission gives information about activity.
Neuroscience is revealing how the brain works.
fMRI shows brain activity in real time.
Different brain areas activate for different tasks.
The brain can rewire itself throughout life.
This is called neuroplasticity.
Learning new skills physically changes the brain.
London taxi drivers have larger hippocampi.
The hippocampus handles spatial memory.
Learning to read changes brain structure.
Meditation physically changes the brain.
It thickens the prefrontal cortex.
This area handles decision-making and self-control.
Exercise also grows new brain cells.
This was once thought impossible.
Sleep is essential for memory consolidation.
During sleep, the brain replays the day's events.
This transfers memories from short-term to long-term storage.
Dreams may be a byproduct of this process.
Everyone dreams, even if they don't remember.
We forget most dreams within minutes of waking.
Lucid dreaming is being aware that you're dreaming.
Some people can control their dreams.
REM sleep is when most dreaming occurs.
REM stands for Rapid Eye Movement.
Sleep deprivation affects the brain like alcohol.
Being awake 17 hours is like having a blood alcohol of 0.05%.
24 hours awake is like 0.10% blood alcohol.
The world record for staying awake is 11 days.
It was set in 1964 by Randy Gardner.
He was supervised by a sleep researcher.
He hallucinated and became paranoid.
He recovered fully with sleep.
Sleep deprivation can be fatal.
There's a rare condition called Fatal Familial Insomnia.
Sufferers gradually lose the ability to sleep.
They die within months.
It's caused by a prion protein.
Prions are misfolded proteins that cause other proteins to misfold.
Mad cow disease is also a prion disease.
Prions survive cooking and sterilization.
They're almost impossible to destroy.
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease is the human version of mad cow disease.
It causes rapid neurological decline.
It's always fatal.
There's no treatment.
Alzheimer's disease affects millions worldwide.
It's characterized by plaques and tangles in the brain.
There's no cure yet.
Parkinson's disease affects dopamine-producing neurons.
Michael J. Fox was diagnosed at 29.
He's been an advocate for research since.
He set up a foundation that has raised billions.
Treatments have improved greatly.
Deep brain stimulation can reduce symptoms dramatically.
Stem cell therapy holds promise for many diseases.
Stem cells can become any type of cell.
Embryonic stem cells are controversial.
Adult stem cells can be reprogrammed.
This is called induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs).
This was discovered by Shinya Yamanaka, who won the Nobel Prize.
Gene therapy can replace defective genes.
CRISPR is a revolutionary gene-editing tool.
It works like molecular scissors.
It can edit genes with great precision.
It was derived from a bacterial immune system.
Jennifer Doudna and Emmanuelle Charpentier won the Nobel Prize for it.
CRISPR could cure genetic diseases.
It could eliminate inherited conditions like sickle cell disease.
It could also be misused.
A Chinese scientist used CRISPR to edit human embryos.
This caused a global outcry.
He was jailed for his actions.
The consensus is that germline editing is not ready.
Germline changes are inherited by future generations.
This raises profound ethical questions.
Bioethics is a growing field.
Medical ethics also covers issues like euthanasia.
Assisted dying is legal in some countries.
The Netherlands was the first to legalize it.
Canada, Belgium, and others have followed.
It remains controversial.
The first heart transplant was in 1967 by Christiaan Barnard.
The patient lived 18 days.
Today heart transplant patients can live decades.
The first successful kidney transplant was in 1954.
Between identical twins.
Organ transplants save thousands of lives yearly.
There are not enough donor organs.
Some countries have opt-out systems.
You're automatically a donor unless you opt out.
This increases the supply of organs.
3D-printed organs are being developed.
Lab-grown organs have been transplanted successfully.
Bioprinting can create tissue and soon whole organs.
The world's first 3D-printed heart was made in 2019.
It was only the size of a rabbit's heart.
But it had cells, vessels, ventricles, and chambers.
The first face transplant was in 2005.
The first full face transplant was in 2010.
The patient has lived normally since.
Transplanted faces take on the recipient's shape over time.
Because bone structure underlies the face.
The first hand transplant was in 1998.
Some recipients have rejected their transplanted hands psychologically.
Body integrity identity disorder makes some feel amputated limbs aren't theirs.
This is a rare but real condition.
Phantom limb pain is pain felt in an amputated limb.
Mirror therapy can treat it.
You watch a mirror reflection of your intact limb.
This tricks the brain into thinking the amputated limb is moving painlessly.
This was discovered by V.S. Ramachandran.
He's one of the most creative neuroscientists.
The brain's body map can be remapped.
Blind people's visual cortex gets taken over by touch and hearing.
This is why blind people sometimes have better senses of touch and hearing.
Deaf people's auditory cortex processes vision.
The brain is incredibly adaptable.
Children's brains are especially plastic.
They can recover from injuries that would disable adults.
A child's entire hemisphere can be removed and they can live normally.
The other hemisphere takes over.
This can't happen in adult brains.
The brain continues developing until age 25.
The prefrontal cortex is the last part to develop.
This explains why teenagers take more risks.
Their risk-assessment is literally not fully developed.
The amygdala drives emotional reactions.
It's sometimes called the brain's alarm system.
PTSD involves an overactive amygdala.
Therapy can actually calm the amygdala.
Antidepressants work by changing neurotransmitter levels.
SSRIs increase serotonin availability.
They take weeks to work.
Placebo effects can be surprisingly powerful.
Even when patients know they're getting placebos.
This is called the open-label placebo effect.
The nocebo effect is the opposite: negative effects from believing something is harmful.
Psychosomatic illnesses are real physical illnesses caused by mental states.
Stress can cause ulcers.
Barry Marshall proved this by drinking bacteria.
He then cured himself with antibiotics.
He won the Nobel Prize.
Before this discovery, ulcers were blamed on stress and diet.
Now they're treated with antibiotics.
H. pylori is the bacterium responsible.
It also increases the risk of stomach cancer.
Cancer is uncontrolled cell growth.
The body usually catches and kills cancerous cells.
When this system fails, cancer develops.
Chemotherapy kills rapidly dividing cells.
This is why it also affects hair, which grows quickly.
Radiation therapy targets tumors with high-energy rays.
Immunotherapy trains the immune system to fight cancer.
It's been revolutionary for some cancers.
Checkpoint inhibitors "release the brakes" on the immune system.
CAR-T cell therapy engineers T-cells to target cancer.
Some cancers have been cured completely with it.
Vaccines can prevent some cancers.
The HPV vaccine prevents cervical cancer.
The hepatitis B vaccine prevents liver cancer.
Cancer rates are rising partly because people live longer.
Most cancers are more common in older people.
Lifestyle factors like smoking, obesity, and alcohol increase risk.
About 5-10% of cancers are purely genetic.
BRCA mutations dramatically increase breast cancer risk.
Angelina Jolie had preventive surgery after testing positive.
She made this discussion mainstream.
Genetic testing can identify cancer risk.
The Human Genome Project mapped all human genes.
It was completed in 2003.
It took 13 years and cost $3 billion.
Now you can sequence a genome for a few hundred dollars.
This has revolutionized medicine.
Personalized medicine tailors treatment to your genes.
Pharmacogenomics matches drugs to your genetic profile.
Some drugs work better for some genetic variants.
Some are harmful to certain genetic variants.
23andMe and other companies offer consumer genetic testing.
They've identified millions of genetic variants.
Privacy concerns surround genetic databases.
Your DNA can identify not just you but your relatives.
Police have used genealogy databases to solve cold cases.
The Golden State Killer was caught this way.
He had eluded police for decades.
A genealogy database matched his distant relative's DNA.
Police narrowed it down from there.
He was identified and arrested in 2018.
Forensic science has evolved dramatically.
Fingerprinting was first used in criminal investigations in 1892.
DNA profiling began in 1986.
The first exoneration by DNA was in 1989.
Over 375 people have been exonerated by DNA evidence in the US.
The Innocence Project has helped free many wrongfully convicted.
Wrongful convictions are more common than people think.
Eyewitness testimony is often unreliable.
Memory is reconstructive, not like a recording.
Every time you recall a memory, you partially rewrite it.
This is why eyewitness accounts can change over time.
False memories can be implanted.
Elizabeth Loftus demonstrated this with the "lost in the mall" experiment.
People "remembered" events that never happened.
The misinformation effect is when false information alters memory.
This has major implications for the justice system.
Confession evidence is also unreliable.
People do confess to crimes they didn't commit.
Sometimes under psychological pressure.
Sometimes to protect someone else.
The Reid Technique of interrogation can produce false confessions.
More reliable interrogation methods are being developed.
Lie detector tests are not reliable.
They're not admissible in most courts.
Body language "experts" are largely pseudoscientific.
Micro-expressions are real but difficult to read accurately.
Paul Ekman studied facial expressions for decades.
He identified universal facial expressions.
Six basic emotions have the same expressions worldwide.
Happiness, sadness, fear, disgust, anger, and surprise.
Some researchers propose contempt as a seventh.
Ekman's work inspired the TV show "Lie to Me."
The show exaggerated what's scientifically possible.
Emotional intelligence is the ability to understand emotions.
It's a predictor of success alongside IQ.
IQ tests measure specific types of intelligence.
Howard Gardner proposed multiple intelligences.
Including musical, spatial, interpersonal, and bodily-kinesthetic.
This theory is popular in education.
But it has limited scientific support.
Growth mindset versus fixed mindset was proposed by Carol Dweck.
People with growth mindsets believe abilities can be developed.
Fixed mindset people believe abilities are innate.
Growth mindset correlates with better academic outcomes.
The Flynn Effect shows IQ scores rising over generations.
But this trend may be reversing in some countries.
Education has changed dramatically over centuries.
Universal public education is relatively recent.
The oldest continuously operating university is Bologna, founded in 1088.
Oxford University was founded around 1096.
Harvard was founded in 1636.
MIT was founded in 1861.
Stanford was founded in 1885.
The GED allows people to earn a high school equivalency.
Millions have earned GEDs.
Online education has exploded.
Coursera, edX, and Khan Academy offer free education.
MIT offers free course materials online.
The internet has democratized information.
Wikipedia has over 60 million articles.
It's written and edited by volunteers.
It's one of the most visited websites.
Its accuracy is comparable to traditional encyclopedias.
The first encyclopedia was created by Diderot in the 1700s.
It was a radical project for its time.
Authorities tried to suppress it.
The printing press was invented by Gutenberg around 1440.
It revolutionized the spread of information.
The Bible was one of the first books printed.
Books became affordable.
Literacy rates rose.
The Reformation was partly enabled by the printing press.
Martin Luther nailed his theses in 1517.
The printing press spread his ideas rapidly.
The Church could no longer control information flow.
The Scientific Revolution followed.
Galileo improved the telescope and observed Jupiter's moons.
He concluded Earth orbits the sun.
He was tried by the Inquisition.
He was placed under house arrest.
He was officially pardoned by the Catholic Church in 1992.
Isaac Newton developed calculus and laws of motion.
He did much of this work during a plague quarantine.
Newton said he stood on the shoulders of giants.
He had a famous rivalry with Leibniz over calculus.
Leibniz developed calculus independently.
Both deserve credit.
Newton also studied alchemy extensively.
He wrote more about theology than physics.
He tried to calculate the date of the end of the world.
He concluded it would be no earlier than 2060.
Blaise Pascal invented the mechanical calculator.
He was a child prodigy.
He invented a precursor to the syringe.
He laid foundations for probability theory.
Pascal's Wager argues it's rational to believe in God.
Descartes said "I think therefore I am."
He contributed to analytic geometry.
The Cartesian coordinate system is named after him.
Archimedes discovered the principle of buoyancy.
Legend says he ran naked through Syracuse shouting "Eureka!"
He calculated pi accurately.
He invented war machines to defend Syracuse.
He was killed by a Roman soldier despite orders to spare him.
His last words were reportedly "Don't disturb my circles."
He was referring to geometric diagrams.
Euclid's geometry was the standard textbook for 2,000 years.
The elements of geometry are still taught today.
Pythagoras led a mathematical cult.
He believed numbers were the basis of all things.
His followers had strange rules, like not eating beans.
The Pythagorean theorem was known before Pythagoras.
He may have just popularized it.
Fibonacci introduced Hindu-Arabic numerals to Europe.
Before that, Roman numerals were used.
Try doing long division with Roman numerals.
Zero was invented by Indian mathematicians.
The concept spread to the Arab world.
Al-Khwarizmi invented algebra.
His name is the root of "algorithm."
Algebra comes from his book "Al-Jabr."
Omar Khayyam solved cubic equations geometrically.
He's better known in the West as a poet.
His Rubaiyat is still read.
The Islamic Golden Age preserved and advanced ancient knowledge.
While Europe was in the Dark Ages.
The House of Wisdom in Baghdad translated Greek texts.
Much ancient knowledge would have been lost without this.
Baghdad was the intellectual center of the world in the 9th century.
The Mongol invasion destroyed the House of Wisdom in 1258.
Books were thrown in the Tigris River until it ran black with ink.
The destruction set back learning by centuries.
The Renaissance began in Italy in the 14th century.
It was a rebirth of classical learning.
Patronage by wealthy families supported artists and scholars.
The Medici family were major patrons.
Leonardo da Vinci was their contemporary.
He was a painter, sculptor, architect, musician, mathematician, engineer, and scientist.
He filled over 13,000 pages with drawings and notes.
He drew detailed anatomical studies.
He conceived of helicopters, tanks, and solar power.
His Vitruvian Man depicts ideal human proportions.
The Mona Lisa may be a self-portrait in female form.
The Mona Lisa has no visible eyebrows.
She may have had them and they faded.
Or it was the fashion at the time.
The Last Supper is painted on a dining room wall.
It's been damaged many times.
It's not in great condition.
Michelangelo spent 4 years painting the Sistine Chapel ceiling.
He mostly stood, not lay on his back.
He argued with the Pope during the commission.
He preferred sculpture to painting.
He signed only one work: the Pietà.
He was in his mid-20s when he carved it.
After rumors it was made by someone else, he signed it.
He later regretted his pride.
Raphael died at 37.
He was incredibly prolific.
He painted the School of Athens.
It depicts Plato and Aristotle with all major ancient philosophers.
Plato points up; Aristotle gestures outward.
This symbolizes their different philosophies.
Plato focused on ideal forms.
Aristotle focused on the empirical world.
Plato was Aristotle's teacher.
Socrates was Plato's teacher.
Socrates wrote nothing; we know him through Plato.
Socrates was sentenced to death for corrupting youth.
He drank hemlock calmly.
He believed the soul was immortal.
Plato's Cave describes people who see only shadows and mistake them for reality.
This is one of the most famous philosophical thought experiments.
Descartes' Evil Demon is similar.
He imagined a demon deceiving all his senses.
He concluded only his own thinking was certain.
The trolley problem is a famous ethical dilemma.
Do you pull a lever to divert a trolley to kill 1 instead of 5?
Responses differ based on moral framework.
Utilitarians would pull the lever.
Deontologists might not.
Virtue ethicists ask what a virtuous person would do.
There's no universally agreed answer.
Kant's categorical imperative: act only according to rules you'd want universal.
The golden rule exists in virtually all cultures.
Do unto others as you'd have them do unto you.
Every major religion has some version of this.
Christianity: do unto others as you'd have done to you.
Islam: wish for your brother what you wish for yourself.
Buddhism: treat others as you'd treat yourself.
Hinduism: treat others as you treat yourself.
Judaism: love your neighbor as yourself.
The world's major religions share many core values.
Despite different beliefs about the divine.
Islam is the fastest-growing religion.
Christianity is the largest religion.
Buddhism began in India in the 5th century BCE.
The Buddha means "the enlightened one."
Siddhartha Gautama was a prince who gave up wealth.
He sat under a Bodhi tree until he achieved enlightenment.
The Bodhi tree species (sacred fig) still exists.
The original tree's descendants are alive today.
One is in Sri Lanka and is 2,300 years old.
It's one of the oldest trees with a known planting date.
The oldest tree is a Great Basin Bristlecone Pine named Methuselah.
It's over 4,850 years old.
Its exact location is kept secret.
Another bristlecone pine named Prometheus was cut down in 1964.
It was 4,900 years old.
The researcher who cut it didn't realize how old it was.
The oldest living organism may be a clonal colony of trees.
Pando in Utah is a clonal colony of quaking aspens.
It's one organism connected by roots.
It covers 106 acres.
It weighs 6,000 tons.
It may be 80,000 years old.
Seagrass meadows in Spain may be 100,000 years old.
Coral can live for thousands of years.
The immortal jellyfish (Turritopsis dohrnii) can revert to its juvenile form.
In theory it could live forever.
But it still gets eaten and dies of disease.
Hydra (a tiny freshwater animal) also shows no signs of aging.
Understanding these organisms could help with human longevity.
The average human lifespan has roughly doubled in 200 years.
Improved sanitation and medicine are the main reasons.
The oldest verified human was Jeanne Calment.
She lived to 122 years.
She smoked until she was 117.
She rode a bicycle until she was 100.
She met Van Gogh as a teenager.
She outlived her daughter and grandson.
The oldest living person today is verified by birth records.
Supercentenarians (over 110) are extremely rare.
Blue Zones are areas with many long-lived people.
They include Sardinia, Okinawa, Loma Linda, and Ikaria.
Common factors: diet, community, purpose, and movement.
The Mediterranean diet is associated with longevity.
It includes olive oil, fish, vegetables, and wine.
Moderate wine consumption may have benefits.
But excessive alcohol is very harmful.
Alcohol is a carcinogen.
It contributes to liver disease, cancers, and accidents.
Alcohol is the third leading preventable cause of death in the US.
Tobacco is the leading preventable cause.
Smoking kills about 8 million people per year globally.
Secondhand smoke also kills.
Vaping was marketed as safer than smoking.
But it has caused serious lung damage.
The long-term effects are unknown.
Exercise is one of the most powerful medicines.
It reduces risk of heart disease, cancer, diabetes, and depression.
30 minutes of walking a day makes a significant difference.
Sitting for long periods is harmful even if you exercise.
Standing desks help.
The human body is designed for movement.
Sedentary lifestyles are a modern problem.
Hunter-gatherers walk 9-14 miles a day.
Modern office workers walk about 1-3 miles.
Steps are associated with longevity.
People who walk more than 8,000 steps a day have significantly lower mortality.
The 10,000 steps goal came from a Japanese marketing campaign.
It wasn't based on scientific research.
But aiming for more steps is still beneficial.
Posture affects health.
"Tech neck" from looking down at phones is increasingly common.
Blue light from screens may disrupt sleep.
Melatonin production is suppressed by blue light.
Night mode on phones reduces blue light.
Our relationship with technology is evolving.
The average person checks their phone 96 times a day.
Social media uses variable reward mechanisms.
Like slot machines.
This creates addictive patterns.
Social media companies have admitted this.
The first social network was Six Degrees in 1997.
MySpace dominated in the mid-2000s.
Facebook overtook it.
Facebook now has about 3 billion users.
TikTok grew faster than any social media platform.
It reached 1 billion users faster than any other app.
Short-form video has changed media consumption.
Attention spans are reportedly decreasing.
Though some researchers dispute this.
The average human attention span is not 8 seconds.
That statistic is often misquoted.
Context affects attention dramatically.
People can focus for hours on engaging content.
The reading brain thinks differently than the "skimming" brain.
Deep reading may be declining.
This is concerning because deep reading promotes empathy.
Fiction readers have higher empathy.
Reading fiction activates the same brain areas as lived experience.
Your brain doesn't distinguish well between real and vividly imagined experiences.
This is why scary movies make your heart race.
Virtual reality can treat phobias.
Exposure therapy works by gradually confronting fears.
Most phobias can be treated.
Common phobias include spiders, heights, and public speaking.
Public speaking is often cited as people's greatest fear.
More feared than death in some surveys.
Jerry Seinfeld joked that at a funeral, people would rather be in the casket.
Glossophobia is the fear of public speaking.
It can be overcome with practice and therapy.
Improv comedy training helps with public speaking anxiety.
Yes-and improv techniques build confidence.
Laughter is genuinely good for your health.
It releases endorphins.
It reduces stress hormones.
It improves immune function.
It's also contagious.
Contagious laughter is a social bonding mechanism.
Humans are the only animals that laugh, but great apes also have laughter-like vocalizations.
Rats laugh at ultrasonic frequencies when tickled.
Laughter evolved before language.
Humor is a universal human trait.
But what's funny varies by culture.
Sarcasm is not universally understood.
Some languages don't have a word for sarcasm.
The word "sarcasm" comes from Greek meaning "to tear flesh."
Irony is different from sarcasm.
Verbal irony is saying the opposite of what you mean.
Situational irony is when outcomes contradict expectations.
Dramatic irony is when the audience knows something characters don't.
Shakespeare used all three masterfully.
He invented over 1,700 common English words.
Including "bedroom", "generous", "lonely", "suspicious", and "dawn."
He wrote 37 plays and 154 sonnets.
His works have been translated into every language.
More films have been made of Hamlet than any other story.
Hamlet's "To be or not to be" is the most analyzed speech in literature.
The full First Folio of Shakespeare was printed in 1623.
Without it, half his plays might be lost.
Only 750 copies were printed.
About 235 survive.
Each sells for millions at auction.
The most expensive book ever sold is the Codex Leicester by Leonardo da Vinci.
Bill Gates bought it for $30.8 million in 1994.
He later scanned and released it digitally.
The most expensive painting ever sold is the Salvator Mundi.
Also attributed to Leonardo da Vinci.
It sold for $450 million in 2017.
Its authenticity is disputed.
The buyer was later revealed to be connected to Saudi Arabia.
The painting hasn't been seen publicly since.
Art theft is surprisingly common.
The Mona Lisa was stolen in 1911.
It was missing for 2 years.
It was hidden in a former Louvre employee's apartment.
Before the theft, few people knew the Mona Lisa.
The theft and recovery made it world-famous.
The Gardner Museum heist in 1990 is the largest art theft.
13 works including Vermeers and Rembrandts were stolen.
They've never been recovered.
The empty frames still hang in the museum.
Per the founder's instructions, nothing can replace them.
Museums have mixed histories with their collections.
Many artifacts were taken during colonialism.
Countries are now requesting their return.
Greece wants the Elgin Marbles from the British Museum.
Egypt wants many artifacts back.
The Benin Bronzes from Nigeria are being returned by some institutions.
The debate over cultural property is ongoing.
Museums argue they preserve and display items to the world.
Source countries argue their heritage was stolen.
Some compromises involve long-term loans.
Digital technology allows virtual access to artifacts.
Augmented reality can show artifacts in their original context.
3D scanning preserves objects that may deteriorate.
The Dead Sea Scrolls have been fully digitized.
They're the oldest manuscripts of the Hebrew Bible.
They were found by a shepherd boy in 1947.
He threw a rock into a cave and heard a pot break.
The scrolls were inside.
They dated to 2,000 years ago.
The discovery changed biblical scholarship.
The Rosetta Stone allowed Egyptologists to decode hieroglyphics.
It was found by Napoleon's soldiers.
Napoleon brought scholars with his army to Egypt.
The British captured it after defeating Napoleon.
It's now in the British Museum.
Egypt wants it back.
Hieroglyphics were undecipherable for 1,400 years.
The Rosetta Stone had the same text in three scripts.
Jean-François Champollion cracked the code in 1822.
He fainted from excitement.
The Voynich Manuscript remains undeciphered.
It's filled with illustrations of plants, astronomy, and human figures.
No one knows the language or what it means.
It dates to the early 15th century.
AI and computational linguistics are being used to analyze it.
Linear A script from ancient Crete is also undeciphered.
Linear B (a related script) was decoded by Michael Ventris.
He was an architect, not a linguist.
He decoded it largely as a hobby.
It turned out to be an early form of Greek.
The Phaistos Disc from Crete is also undeciphered.
These ancient mysteries may never be solved.
Some ancient languages are known only from a few fragments.
The Etruscans were sophisticated but their language is largely lost.
Ancient languages reveal how people thought.
The Piraha language has no numbers, colors, or recursion.
This challenges the idea that all languages share deep structure.
Some languages have dozens of words for snow.
Some have no word for blue.
Languages shape how we perceive the world.
This is the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis.
Its strong version (language determines thought) is not supported.
The weak version (language influences thought) has evidence.
Speakers of languages with gendered nouns see objects differently.
Germans describe a bridge (feminine in German) with feminine traits.
Spaniards (masculine bridge) use masculine traits.
Language affects memory.
Russian speakers have two words for blue.
They distinguish light blue and dark blue faster.
Languages are dying at an alarming rate.
One language dies every two weeks.
There are about 7,000 languages today.
Half are expected to die this century.
Language death is tied to cultural loss.
Some languages are being revived.
Welsh speakers have increased in Wales.
Hebrew was revived as a spoken language.
It was largely a written/religious language for 2,000 years.
Eliezer Ben-Yehuda dedicated his life to reviving Hebrew.
His son was the first native Hebrew speaker in modern times.
Today 9 million people speak Hebrew as a first language.
The Māori language has seen revival in New Zealand.
Schools teach it.
It's an official language.
The Irish language is also being supported by the government.
These revivals show that language death isn't inevitable.
The United Nations has 6 official languages.
English, French, Spanish, Russian, Chinese, and Arabic.
The most widely spoken language is English.
Mandarin Chinese has the most native speakers.
Spanish is growing fastest among world languages.
The language with the most distinct sounds is !Xóõ, a Khoisan language.
It has over 100 consonants.
Including click consonants.
The Pirahã language has the fewest distinct phonemes.
Languages reveal migration patterns of ancient humans.
Indo-European languages share a common ancestor.
Linguists have reconstructed Proto-Indo-European.
We can guess words for horse, wheel, and cattle.
The horse and wheel were key to Indo-European expansion.
The horse was domesticated around 3500 BCE.
Chariots revolutionized warfare.
The Mongols were the greatest horse warriors.
At their peak, the Mongol Empire was the largest in history.
It covered 24 million square kilometers.
Genghis Khan created it from a collection of tribes.
He was illiterate but created a written language for his empire.
He created the first international postal system.
He granted religious freedom throughout his empire.
He killed tens of millions of people.
His conquests may have cooled the climate.
Forests regrew on abandoned farmland, absorbing CO2.
The Black Death also reduced global temperatures.
It killed up to half of Europe's population.
The cause was the bacterium Yersinia pestis.
It's carried by fleas on rats.
The plague still exists today.
It's treatable with antibiotics.
There are about 1,000-2,000 cases per year worldwide.
The Spanish Flu of 1918 killed 50-100 million people.
It killed more people than World War I.
It was called Spanish because Spain (neutral) reported it freely.
It actually started in Kansas.
Young adults were uniquely vulnerable.
COVID-19 echoed many historical pandemics.
Quarantine comes from the Italian for "40 days."
Ships were held for 40 days before passengers could land.
The Black Death also spread via trade routes.
Isolation was the only defense before medicine.
The first vaccine was for smallpox, by Edward Jenner in 1796.
He noticed milkmaids who got cowpox didn't get smallpox.
He inoculated a boy with cowpox.
Then exposed him to smallpox.
The boy didn't get sick.
This was an experiment that would be illegal today.
But it launched the science of vaccination.
Smallpox was eradicated in 1980.
It's the only human disease to be eradicated.
Rinderpest (a cattle disease) was also eradicated.
Polio is close to eradication.
Guinea worm disease is near eradication.
Measles could be eradicated if vaccination rates were high enough.
Herd immunity protects those who can't be vaccinated.
About 95% vaccination rate is needed for measles herd immunity.
Vaccines are one of the greatest public health achievements.
They save millions of lives every year.
Antibiotics were discovered in 1928 by Alexander Fleming.
He noticed mold killing bacteria in his petri dish.
He nearly threw the dish away.
Penicillin saved millions of lives in WWII.
Antibiotic resistance is a growing crisis.
Bacteria evolve to resist antibiotics.
Antibiotic-resistant infections kill 700,000 people per year.
This could rise to 10 million by 2050.
Overprescription and agricultural use drive resistance.
New antibiotics are urgently needed.
No new class of antibiotics has been developed since the 1980s.
Phage therapy uses viruses that kill bacteria.
It was used before antibiotics.
It's being revisited as antibiotics fail.
The human gut has more bacteria than human cells.
Gut bacteria affect mood, immunity, and metabolism.
The microbiome is being called the "second brain."
Probiotics may support gut health.
Fermented foods promote gut diversity.
Gut health affects mental health.
This is called the gut-brain axis.
The vagus nerve connects the gut and brain.
Anxiety often manifests as gut problems.
The "butterfly feeling" is real: nerves affect the gut.
Emotional states change digestion.
The gut can sense its own environment.
Many neurotransmitters are produced in the gut.
90% of serotonin is produced in the gut.
This is why gut problems can affect mood.
The future of medicine includes microbiome therapy.
Fecal transplants can cure C. difficile infection.
The donor's bacteria restore healthy gut flora.
It's remarkably effective.
It sounds unpleasant but is life-saving.
Medicine has come incredibly far in a century.
Many conditions once fatal are now manageable.
Insulin was discovered in 1921.
Before that, diabetes type 1 was fatal.
Frederick Banting and Charles Best discovered it.
They were awarded the Nobel Prize.
Banting shared his prize with his student, Best.
Best was too young to be included by the committee.
Banting felt this was unfair.
This story illustrates both the brilliance and politics of science.
Science advances through collaboration and competition.
Peer review keeps science honest.
Replication confirms results.
The replication crisis shows many psychology studies don't replicate.
Science self-corrects over time.
This is a feature, not a bug.
Scientific consensus matters, even if individual studies vary.
The evidence for human-caused climate change is overwhelming.
97% of climate scientists agree on this.
The evidence comes from multiple independent lines.
Temperature records, ice cores, ocean heat, sea level rise, and more.
The hottest years on record keep occurring recently.
The effects of climate change are already visible.
Glaciers are retreating worldwide.
Arctic sea ice is at record low extent.
Coral reefs are bleaching.
Species ranges are shifting.
Extreme weather events are becoming more frequent.
Sea levels are rising about 3.3 mm per year.
This threatens coastal cities.
Miami, Jakarta, and Dhaka are among the most vulnerable.
Jakarta is sinking due to groundwater extraction.
Indonesia is building a new capital city.
Solar power is now the cheapest electricity source in history.
Wind power is also very cheap.
Renewables are growing faster than any energy source.
Battery storage is improving.
Electric vehicles are becoming mainstream.
The energy transition is underway.
But it needs to happen much faster.
Carbon capture technology is being developed.
Trees are the cheapest carbon capture technology.
Planting trees can help, but not solve climate change.
Preserving existing forests is more important.
A deforested area takes decades to recover its carbon storage.
Individual actions matter but systemic change is essential.
Governments and corporations drive most emissions.
The Paris Agreement aims to limit warming to 1.5-2°C.
It's voluntary and not legally binding.
Current pledges are not sufficient.
But technology is advancing faster than expected.
The future is uncertain but not predetermined.
Human ingenuity has solved seemingly impossible problems before.
The ozone layer was being depleted; we fixed it.
The Cuyahoga River was dead; it recovered.
Populations of many endangered species have grown.
With sufficient will, humans can solve major problems.
The question is whether we have that will.
Democracy, science, and international cooperation are the tools.
The next generation will face these challenges.
Education is the foundation.
Critical thinking is the skill of the age.
The ability to evaluate evidence and reason clearly.
This is more important than memorizing facts.
Because facts can be looked up.
But wisdom requires experience and reflection.
The most important question is not what you know, but how you think.
